It is now a long-established tradition that at the beginning of each new year the Pope meets the Diplomatic Corps accredited to the Holy See to offer his greetings and good wishes, and to share some reflections close to his heart as a pastor concerned for the joys and sufferings of humanity.

 Today’s meeting, therefore, is a source of great joy.

 It allows me to extend to you and your families, and to the civil authorities and the peoples whom you represent, my heartfelt best wishes for a new year of blessings and peace.


Before all else, I thank your Dean, Jean-Claude Michel, who has spoken in your name of the affection and esteem which binds your nations to the Apostolic See.

 I am happy to see you here in such great numbers, after having met you for the first time just a few days after my election.

 In the meantime, many new Ambassadors have taken up their duties and I welcome them once again.

 Among those who have left us, I cannot fail to mention the late Ambassador Alejandro Valladares Lanza, for many years the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps, whom the Lord called to himself several months ago.



The year just ended was particularly eventful, not only in the life of the Church but also in the context of the relations which the Holy See maintains with states and international organizations.

 I recall in particular the establishment of diplomatic relations with South Sudan, the signing of basic or specific accords with Cape Verde, Hungary and Chad, and the ratification of the accord with Equatorial Guinea signed in 2012.

 On the regional level too, the presence of the Holy See has expanded, both in Central America, where it became an Extra-Regional Observer to the Sistema de la Integración Centroamericana, and in Africa, with its accreditation as the first Permanent Observer to the Economic Community of West African States.



In my Message for the World Day of Peace, dedicated to fraternity as the foundation and pathway to peace, I observed that “fraternity is generally first learned within the family…”, for the family “by its vocation… is meant to spread its love to the world around it” and to contribute to the growth of that spirit of service and sharing which builds peace.

 This is the message of the Crib, where we see the Holy Family, not alone and isolated from the world, but surrounded by shepherds and the Magi, that is by an open community in which there is room for everyone, poor and rich alike, those near and those afar.

 In this way we can appreciate the insistence of my beloved predecessor Benedict XVI that “the language of the family is a language of peace”.



Sadly, this is often not the case, as the number of broken and troubled families is on the rise, not simply because of the weakening sense of belonging so typical of today’s world, but also because of the adverse conditions in which many families are forced to live, even to the point where they lack basic means of subsistence.

 There is a need for suitable policies aimed at supporting, assisting and strengthening the family!


It also happens that the elderly are looked upon as a burden, while young people lack clear prospects for their lives.

 Yet the elderly and the young are the hope of humanity.

 The elderly bring with them wisdom born of experience; the young open us to the future and prevent us from becoming self-absorbed.

 It is prudent to keep the elderly from being ostracized from the life of society, so as to preserve the living memory of each people.

 It is likewise important to invest in the young through suitable initiatives which can help them to find employment and establish homes.

 We must not stifle their enthusiasm!
 I vividly recall my experience at the Twenty-Eighth World Youth Day in Rio de Janeiro.

 I met so many happy young people!
 What great hope and expectation is present in their eyes and in their prayers!
 What a great thirst for life and a desire for openness to others!
 Being closed and isolated always makes for a stifling, heavy atmosphere which sooner or later ends up creating sadness and oppression.

 What is needed instead is a shared commitment to favouring a culture of encounter, for only those able to reach out to others are capable of bearing fruit, creating bonds of communion, radiating joy and being peacemakers.



The scenes of destruction and death which we have witnessed in the past year confirm all this – if ever we needed such confirmation.

 How much pain and desperation are caused by self-centredness which gradually takes the form of envy, selfishness, competition and the thirst for power and money!
 At times it seems that these realities are destined to have the upper hand.

 Christmas, on the other hand, inspires in us Christians the certainty that the final, definitive word belongs to the Prince of Peace, who changes “swords into plowshares and spears into pruning hooks” (cf.

 Is 2:4), transforming selfishness into self-giving and revenge into forgiveness.



It is with this confidence that I wish to look to the year ahead.

 I continue to be hopeful that the conflict in Syria will finally come to an end.

 Concern for that beloved people, and a desire to avert the worsening of violence, moved me last September to call for a day of fasting and prayer.

 Through you I heartily thank all those in your countries – public authorities and people of good will – who joined in this initiative.

 What is presently needed is a renewed political will to end the conflict.

 In this regard, I express my hope that the Geneva 2 Conference, to be held on 22 January, will mark the beginning of the desired peace process.

 At the same time, full respect for humanitarian law remains essential.

 It is unacceptable that unarmed civilians, especially children, become targets.

 I also encourage all parties to promote and ensure in every way possible the provision of urgently-needed aid to much of the population, without overlooking the praiseworthy effort of those countries – especially Lebanon and Jordan – which have generously welcomed to their territory numerous refugees from Syria.



Remaining in the Middle East, I note with concern the tensions affecting the region in various ways.

 I am particularly concerned by the ongoing political problems in Lebanon, where a climate of renewed cooperation between the different components of civil society and the political powers is essential for avoiding the further hostilities which would undermine the stability of the country.

 I think too of Egypt, with its need to regain social harmony, and Iraq, which struggles to attain the peace and stability for which it hopes.

 At the same time, I note with satisfaction the significant progress made in the dialogue between Iran and the Group of 5+1 on the nuclear issue.



Everywhere, the way to resolve open questions must be that of diplomacy and dialogue.

 This is the royal road already indicated with utter clarity by Pope Benedict XV when he urged the leaders of the European nations to make “the moral force of law” prevail over the “material force of arms” in order to end that “needless carnage” which was the First World War, whose centenary occurs this year.

 What is needed is courage “to go beyond the surface of the conflict” and to consider others in their deepest dignity, so that unity will prevail over conflict and it will be “possible to build communion amid disagreement”.

 In this regard, the resumption of peace talks between Israelis and Palestinians is a positive sign, and I express my hope that both parties will resolve, with the support of the international community, to take courageous decisions aimed at finding a just and lasting solution to a conflict which urgently needs to end.

 I myself intend to make a pilgrimage of peace to the Holy Land in the course of this year.

 The exodus of Christians from the Middle East and North Africa continues to be a source of concern.

 They want to continue to be a part of the social, political and cultural life of countries which they helped to build, and they desire to contribute to the common good of societies where they wish to be fully accepted as agents of peace and reconciliation.



In other parts of Africa as well, Christians are called to give witness to God’s love and mercy.

 We must never cease to do good, even when it is difficult and demanding, and when we endure acts of intolerance if not genuine persecution.

 In vast areas of Nigeria violence persists, and much innocent blood continues to be spilt.

 I think above all of the Central African Republic, where much suffering has been caused as a result of the country’s tensions, which have frequently led to devastation and death.

 As I assure you of my prayers for the victims and the many refugees, forced to live in dire poverty, I express my hope that the concern of the international community will help to bring an end to violence, a return to the rule of law and guaranteed access to humanitarian aid, also in the remotest parts of the country.

 For her part, the Catholic Church will continue to assure her presence and cooperation, working generously to help people in every possible way and, above all, to rebuild a climate of reconciliation and of peace among all groups in society.

 Reconciliation and peace are likewise fundamental priorities in other parts of Africa.

 I think in particular of Mali, where we nonetheless note the promising restoration of the country’s democratic structures, and of South Sudan, where, on the contrary, political instability has lately led to many deaths and a new humanitarian crisis.



The Holy See is also closely following events in Asia, where the Church desires to share the joys and hopes of all the peoples of that vast and noble continent.

 On this, the fiftieth anniversary of diplomatic relations with the Republic of Korea, I wish to implore from God the gift of reconciliation on the peninsula, and I trust that, for the good of all the Korean people, the interested parties will tirelessly seek out points of agreement and possible solutions.

 Asia, in fact, has a long history of peaceful coexistence between its different civil, ethnic and religious groups.

 Such reciprocal respect needs to be encouraged, especially given certain troubling signs that it is weakening, particularly where growing attitudes of prejudice, for allegedly religious reasons, are tending to deprive Christians of their liberties and to jeopardize civil coexistence.

 The Holy See looks, instead, with lively hope to the signs of openness coming from countries of great religious and cultural traditions, with whom it wishes to cooperate in the pursuit of the common good.



Peace is also threatened by every denial of human dignity, firstly the lack of access to adequate nutrition.

 We cannot be indifferent to those suffering from hunger, especially children, when we think of how much food is wasted every day in many parts of the world immersed in what I have often termed “the throwaway culture”.

 Unfortunately, what is thrown away is not only food and dispensable objects, but often human beings themselves, who are discarded as “unnecessary”.

 For example, it is frightful even to think there are children, victims of abortion, who will never see the light of day; children being used as soldiers, abused and killed in armed conflicts; and children being bought and sold in that terrible form of modern slavery which is human trafficking, which is a crime against humanity.



Nor can we be unmoved by the tragedies which have forced so many people to flee from famine, violence and oppression, particularly in the Horn of Africa and in the Great Lakes Region.

 Many of these are living as fugitives or refugees in camps where they are no longer seen as persons but as nameless statistics.

 Others, in the hope of a better life, have undertaken perilous journeys which not infrequently end in tragedy.

 I think in particular of the many migrants from Latin America bound for the United States, but above all of all those from Africa and the Middle East who seek refuge in Europe.



Still vivid in my memory is the brief visit I made to Lampedusa last July, to pray for the numerous victims of the refugee crisis in the Mediterranean.

 Sadly, there is a general indifference in the face of these tragedies, which is a dramatic sign of the loss of that “sense of responsibility for our brothers and sisters”, on which every civil society is based.

 On that occasion I was also able to observe the hospitality and dedication shown by so many people.

 It is my hope that the Italian people, whom I regard with affection, not least for the common roots which unite us, will renew their praiseworthy commitment of solidarity towards the weakest and most vulnerable, and, with generous and coordinated efforts by citizens and institutions, overcome present difficulties and regain their long-standing climate of constructive social creativity.



Finally, I wish to mention another threat to peace, which arises from the greedy exploitation of environmental resources.

 Even if “nature is at our disposition”, all too often we do not “respect it or consider it a gracious gift which we must care for and set at the service of our brothers and sisters, including future generations”.

 Here too what is crucial is responsibility on the part of all in pursuing, in a spirit of fraternity, policies respectful of this earth which is our common home.

 I recall a popular saying: “God always forgives, we sometimes forgive, but when nature – creation – is mistreated, she never forgives!
”.

 We have also witnessed the devastating effects of several recent natural disasters.

 In particular, I would mention once more the numerous victims and the great devastation caused in the Philippines and other countries of Southeast Asia as a result of typhoon Haiyan.


I am pleased to welcome you, Mr Secretary-General and the leading executive officers of the Agencies, Funds and Programmes of the United Nations and specialized Organizations, as you gather in Rome for the biannual meeting for strategic coordination of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board.



It is significant that today’s meeting takes place shortly after the solemn canonization of my predecessors, Popes John XXIII and John Paul II.

 The new saints inspire us by their passionate concern for integral human development and for understanding between peoples.

 This concern was concretely expressed by the numerous visits of John Paul II to the Organizations headquartered in Rome and by his travels to New York, Geneva, Vienna, Nairobi and The Hague.



I thank you, Mr Secretary-General, for your cordial words of introduction.

 I thank all of you, who are primarily responsible for the international system, for the great efforts being made to ensure world peace, respect for human dignity, the protection of persons, especially the poorest and most vulnerable, and harmonious economic and social development.



The results of the Millennium Development Goals, especially in terms of education and the decrease in extreme poverty, confirm the value of the work of coordination carried out by this Chief Executives Board.

 At the same time, it must be kept in mind that the world’s peoples deserve and expect even greater results.



An essential principle of management is the refusal to be satisfied with current results and to press forward, in the conviction that those gains are only consolidated by working to achieve even more.

 In the case of global political and economic organization, much more needs to be achieved, since an important part of humanity does not share in the benefits of progress and is in fact relegated to the status of second-class citizens.

 Future Sustainable Development Goals must therefore be formulated and carried out with generosity and courage, so that they can have a real impact on the structural causes of poverty and hunger, attain more substantial results in protecting the environment, ensure dignified and productive labor for all, and provide appropriate protection for the family, which is an essential element in sustainable human and social development.

 Specifically, this involves challenging all forms of injustice and resisting the “economy of exclusion”, the “throwaway culture” and the “culture of death” which nowadays sadly risk becoming passively accepted.



With this in mind, I would like to remind you, as representatives of the chief agencies of global cooperation, of an incident which took place two thousand years ago and is recounted in the Gospel of Saint Luke (19:1-10).

 It is the encounter between Jesus Christ and the rich tax collector Zacchaeus, as a result of which Zacchaeus made a radical decision of sharing and justice, because his conscience had been awakened by the gaze of Jesus.

 This same spirit should be at the beginning and end of all political and economic activity.

 The gaze, often silent, of that part of the human family which is cast off, left behind, ought to awaken the conscience of political and economic agents and lead them to generous and courageous decisions with immediate results, like the decision of Zacchaeus.

 Does this spirit of solidarity and sharing guide all our thoughts and actions, I ask myself?



Today, in concrete terms, an awareness of the dignity of each of our brothers and sisters whose life is sacred and inviolable from conception to natural death must lead us to share with complete freedom the goods which God’s providence has placed in our hands, material goods but also intellectual and spiritual ones, and to give back generously and lavishly whatever we may have earlier unjustly refused to others.



The account of Jesus and Zacchaeus teaches us that above and beyond economic and social systems and theories, there will always be a need to promote generous, effective and practical openness to the needs of others.

 Jesus does not ask Zacchaeus to change jobs nor does he condemn his financial activity; he simply inspires him to put everything, freely yet immediately and indisputably, at the service of others.

 Consequently, I do not hesitate to state, as did my predecessors (cf.

 JOHN PAUL II, Sollicitudo Rei Socialis, 42-43; Centesimus Annus, 43; BENEDICT XVI, Caritas in Veritate, 6; 24-40), that equitable economic and social progress can only be attained by joining scientific and technical abilities with an unfailing commitment to solidarity accompanied by a generous and disinterested spirit of gratuitousness at every level.

 A contribution to this equitable development will also be made both by international activity aimed at the integral human development of all the world’s peoples and by the legitimate redistribution of economic benefits by the State, as well as indispensable cooperation between the private sector and civil society.



Consequently, while encouraging you in your continuing efforts to coordinate the activity of the international agencies, which represents a service to all humanity, I urge you to work together in promoting a true, worldwide ethical mobilization which, beyond all differences of religious or political convictions, will spread and put into practice a shared ideal of fraternity and solidarity, especially with regard to the poorest and those most excluded.



Invoking divine guidance on the work of your Board, I also implore God’s special blessing for you, Mr Secretary-General, for the Presidents, Directors and Secretaries General present among us, and for all the personnel of the United Nations and the other international Agencies and Bodies, and their respective families.

 Thank you very much.


I am most grateful for your invitation to address this joint session of Congress in “the land of the free and the home of the brave.

" I would like to think that the reason for this is that I, too, am a son of this great continent, from which we have all received so much and toward which we share a common responsibility.



Each son or daughter of a given country has a mission, a personal and social responsibility.

 Your own responsibility as members of Congress is to enable this country, by your legislative activity, to grow as a nation.

 You are the face of its people, their representatives.

 You are called to defend and preserve the dignity of your fellow citizens in the tireless and demanding pursuit of the common good, for this is the chief aim of all politics.

 A political society endures when it seeks, as a vocation, to satisfy common needs by stimulating the growth of all its members, especially those in situations of greater vulnerability or risk.

 Legislative activity is always based on care for the people.

 To this you have been invited, called and convened by those who elected you.



Yours is a work which makes me reflect in two ways on the figure of Moses.

 On the one hand, the patriarch and lawgiver of the people of Israel symbolizes the need of peoples to keep alive their sense of unity by means of just legislation.

 On the other, the figure of Moses leads us directly to God and thus to the transcendent dignity of the human being.

 Moses provides us with a good synthesis of your work: you are asked to protect, by means of the law, the image and likeness fashioned by God on every human face.



Today, I would like not only to address you, but through you the entire people of the United States.

 Here, together with their representatives, I would like to take this opportunity to dialogue with the many thousands of men and women who strive each day to do an honest day’s work, to bring home their daily bread, to save money and — one step at a time — to build a better life for their families.

 These are men and women who are not concerned simply with paying their taxes, but in their own quiet way sustain the life of society.

 They generate solidarity by their actions, and they create organizations which offer a helping hand to those most in need

I would also like to enter into dialogue with the many elderly persons who are a storehouse of wisdom forged by experience, and who seek in many ways, especially through volunteer work, to share their stories and their insights.

 I know that many of them are retired, but still active; they keep working to build up this land.

 I also want to dialogue with all those young people who are working to realize their great and noble aspirations, who are not led astray by facile proposals, and who face difficult situations, often as a result of immaturity on the part of many adults.

 I wish to dialogue with all of you, and I would like to do so through the historical memory of your people.



My visit takes place at a time when men and women of good will are marking the anniversaries of several great Americans.

 The complexities of history and the reality of human weakness notwithstanding, these men and women, for all their many differences and limitations, were able by hard work and self-sacrifice — some at the cost of their lives — to build a better future.

 They shaped fundamental values which will endure forever in the spirit of the American people.

 A people with this spirit can live through many crises, tensions and conflicts, while always finding the resources to move forward, and to do so with dignity.

 These men and women offer us a way of seeing and interpreting reality.

 In honoring their memory, we are inspired, even amid conflicts, and in the here and now of each day, to draw upon our deepest cultural reserves.



I would like to mention four of these Americans: Abraham Lincoln, Martin Luther King, Dorothy Day and Thomas Merton.



This year marks the 150th anniversary of the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln, the guardian of liberty, who labored tirelessly that “this nation, under God, might have a new birth of freedom.

" Building a future of freedom requires love of the common good and cooperation in a spirit of subsidiarity and solidarity.



All of us are quite aware of, and deeply worried by, the disturbing social and political situation of the world today.

 Our world is increasingly a place of violent conflict, hatred and brutal atrocities, committed even in the name of God and of religion.

 We know that no religion is immune from forms of individual delusion or ideological extremism.

 This means that we must be especially attentive to every type of fundamentalism, whether religious or of any other kind.

 A delicate balance is required to combat violence perpetrated in the name of a religion, an ideology or an economic system, while also safeguarding religious freedom, intellectual freedom and individual freedoms.

 But there is another temptation which we must especially guard against: the simplistic reductionism which sees only good or evil; or, if you will, the righteous and sinners.

 The contemporary world, with its open wounds which affect so many of our brothers and sisters, demands that we confront every form of polarization which would divide it into these two camps.

 We know that in the attempt to be freed of the enemy without, we can be tempted to feed the enemy within.

 To imitate the hatred and violence of tyrants and murderers is the best way to take their place.

 That is something which you, as a people, reject.



Our response must instead be one of hope and healing, of peace and justice.

 We are asked to summon the courage and the intelligence to resolve today’s many geopolitical and economic crises.

 Even in the developed world, the effects of unjust structures and actions are all too apparent.

 Our efforts must aim at restoring hope, righting wrongs, maintaining commitments, and thus promoting the well-being of individuals and of peoples.

 We must move forward together, as one, in a renewed spirit of fraternity and solidarity, cooperating generously for the common good.



The challenges facing us today call for a renewal of that spirit of cooperation, which has accomplished so much good throughout the history of the United States.

 The complexity, the gravity and the urgency of these challenges demand that we pool our resources and talents, and resolve to support one another, with respect for our differences and our convictions of conscience.



In this land, the various religious denominations have greatly contributed to building and strengthening society.

 It is important that today, as in the past, the voice of faith continues to be heard, for it is a voice of fraternity and love, which tries to bring out the best in each person and in each society.

 Such cooperation is a powerful resource in the battle to eliminate new global forms of slavery, born of grave injustices which can be overcome only through new policies and new forms of social consensus.



Politics is, instead, an expression of our compelling need to live as one, in order to build as one the greatest common good: that of a community which sacrifices particular interests in order to share, in justice and peace, its goods, its interests, its social life.

 I do not underestimate the difficulty that this involves, but I encourage you in this effort.



Here, too, I think of the march which Martin Luther King led from Selma to Montgomery 50 years ago as part of the campaign to fulfill his “dream” of full civil and political rights for African Americans.

 That dream continues to inspire us all.

 I am happy that America continues to be, for many, a land of “dreams.

" Dreams which lead to action, to participation, to commitment.

 Dreams which awaken what is deepest and truest in the life of a people.



In recent centuries, millions of people came to this land to pursue their dream of building a future in freedom.

 We, the people of this continent, are not fearful of foreigners, because most of us were once foreigners.

 I say this to you as the son of immigrants, knowing that so many of you are also descended from immigrants.

 Tragically, the rights of those who were here long before us were not always respected.

 For those peoples and their nations, from the heart of American democracy, I wish to reaffirm my highest esteem and appreciation.

 Those first contacts were often turbulent and violent, but it is difficult to judge the past by the criteria of the present.

 Nonetheless, when the stranger in our midst appeals to us, we must not repeat the sins and the errors of the past.

 We must resolve now to live as nobly and as justly as possible, as we educate new generations not to turn their back on our “neighbors” and everything around us.

 Building a nation calls us to recognize that we must constantly relate to others, rejecting a mindset of hostility in order to adopt one of reciprocal subsidiarity, in a constant effort to do our best.

 I am confident that we can do this.



Our world is facing a refugee crisis of a magnitude not seen since the Second World War.

 This presents us with great challenges and many hard decisions.

 On this continent, too, thousands of persons are led to travel north in search of a better life for themselves and for their loved ones, in search of greater opportunities.

 Is this not what we want for our own children?

 We must not be taken aback by their numbers, but rather view them as persons, seeing their faces and listening to their stories, trying to respond as best we can to their situation.

 To respond in a way which is always humane, just and fraternal.

 We need to avoid a common temptation nowadays: to discard whatever proves troublesome.

 Let us remember the Golden Rule: “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you”.



This rule points us in a clear direction.

 Let us treat others with the same passion and compassion with which we want to be treated.

 Let us seek for others the same possibilities which we seek for ourselves.

 Let us help others to grow, as we would like to be helped ourselves.

 In a word, if we want security, let us give security; if we want life, let us give life; if we want opportunities, let us provide opportunities.

 The yardstick we use for others will be the yardstick which time will use for us.

 The Golden Rule also reminds us of our responsibility to protect and defend human life at every stage of its development.



This conviction has led me, from the beginning of my ministry, to advocate at different levels for the global abolition of the death penalty.

 I am convinced that this way is the best, since every life is sacred, every human person is endowed with an inalienable dignity, and society can only benefit from the rehabilitation of those convicted of crimes.

 Recently, my brother bishops here in the United States renewed their call for the abolition of the death penalty.

 Not only do I support them, but I also offer encouragement to all those who are convinced that a just and necessary punishment must never exclude the dimension of hope and the goal of rehabilitation.



In these times when social concerns are so important, I cannot fail to mention the servant of God Dorothy Day, who founded the Catholic Worker Movement.

 Her social activism, her passion for justice and for the cause of the oppressed, were inspired by the Gospel, her faith and the example of the saints.



How much progress has been made in this area in so many parts of the world!
 How much has been done in these first years of the third millennium to raise people out of extreme poverty!
 I know that you share my conviction that much more still needs to be done, and that in times of crisis and economic hardship a spirit of global solidarity must not be lost.

 At the same time I would encourage you to keep in mind all those people around us who are trapped in a cycle of poverty.

 They too need to be given hope.

 The fight against poverty and hunger must be fought constantly and on many fronts, especially in its causes.

 I know that many Americans today, as in the past, are working to deal with this problem.



It goes without saying that part of this great effort is the creation and distribution of wealth.

 The right use of natural resources, the proper application of technology and the harnessing of the spirit of enterprise are essential elements of an economy which seeks to be modern, inclusive and sustainable.

 “Business is a noble vocation, directed to producing wealth and improving the world.

 It can be a fruitful source of prosperity for the area in which it operates, especially if it sees the creation of jobs as an essential part of its service to the common good”.

 This common good also includes the Earth, a central theme of the encyclical which I recently wrote in order to “enter into dialogue with all people about our common home”.

 “We need a conversation which includes everyone, since the environmental challenge we are undergoing, and its human roots, concern and affect us all”.



In Laudato Si’, I call for a courageous and responsible effort to “redirect our steps”, and to avert the most serious effects of the environmental deterioration caused by human activity.

 I am convinced that we can make a difference and I have no doubt that the United States — and this Congress — have an important role to play.

 Now is the time for courageous actions and strategies, aimed at implementing a “culture of care" and “an integrated approach to combating poverty, restoring dignity to the excluded, and at the same time protecting nature” .

 “We have the freedom needed to limit and direct technology”; “to devise intelligent ways of … developing and limiting our power”; and to put technology “at the service of another type of progress, one which is healthier, more human, more social, more integral”.

 In this regard, I am confident that America’s outstanding academic and research institutions can make a vital contribution in the years ahead.



A century ago, at the beginning of the Great War, which Pope Benedict XV termed a “pointless slaughter,” another notable American was born: the Cistercian monk Thomas Merton.

 He remains a source of spiritual inspiration and a guide for many people.

 In his autobiography, he wrote: “I came into the world.

 Free by nature, in the image of God, I was nevertheless the prisoner of my own violence and my own selfishness, in the image of the world into which I was born.

 That world was the picture of Hell, full of men like myself, loving God, and yet hating him; born to love him, living instead in fear of hopeless self-contradictory hungers.

" Merton was above all a man of prayer, a thinker who challenged the certitudes of his time and opened new horizons for souls and for the Church.

 He was also a man of dialogue, a promoter of peace between peoples and religions.



From this perspective of dialogue, I would like to recognize the efforts made in recent months to help overcome historic differences linked to painful episodes of the past.

 It is my duty to build bridges and to help all men and women, in any way possible, to do the same.

 When countries which have been at odds resume the path of dialogue — a dialogue which may have been interrupted for the most legitimate of reasons — new opportunities open up for all.

 This has required, and requires, courage and daring, which is not the same as irresponsibility.

 A good political leader is one who, with the interests of all in mind, seizes the moment in a spirit of openness and pragmatism.

 A good political leader always opts to initiate processes rather than possessing spaces.



Being at the service of dialogue and peace also means being truly determined to minimize and, in the long term, to end the many armed conflicts throughout our world.

 Here we have to ask ourselves: Why are deadly weapons being sold to those who plan to inflict untold suffering on individuals and society?

 Sadly, the answer, as we all know, is simply for money: money that is drenched in blood, often innocent blood.

 In the face of this shameful and culpable silence, it is our duty to confront the problem and to stop the arms trade.



Three sons and a daughter of this land, four individuals and four dreams: Lincoln, liberty; Martin Luther King, liberty in plurality and non-exclusion; Dorothy Day, social justice and the rights of persons; and Thomas Merton, the capacity for dialogue and openness to God.



Four representatives of the American people.



I will end my visit to your country in Philadelphia, where I will take part in the World Meeting of Families.

 It is my wish that throughout my visit the family should be a recurrent theme.

 How essential the family has been to the building of this country!
 And how worthy it remains of our support and encouragement!
 Yet I cannot hide my concern for the family, which is threatened, perhaps as never before, from within and without.

 Fundamental relationships are being called into question, as is the very basis of marriage and the family.

 I can only reiterate the importance and, above all, the richness and the beauty of family life.



In particular, I would like to call attention to those family members who are the most vulnerable, the young.

 For many of them, a future filled with countless possibilities beckons, yet so many others seem disoriented and aimless, trapped in a hopeless maze of violence, abuse and despair.

 Their problems are our problems.

 We cannot avoid them.

 We need to face them together, to talk about them and to seek effective solutions rather than getting bogged down in discussions.

 At the risk of oversimplifying, we might say that we live in a culture which pressures young people not to start a family, because they lack possibilities for the future.

 Yet this same culture presents others with so many options that they too are dissuaded from starting a family.



A nation can be considered great when it defends liberty as Lincoln did, when it fosters a culture which enables people to “dream” of full rights for all their brothers and sisters, as Martin Luther King sought to do; when it strives for justice and the cause of the oppressed, as Dorothy Day did by her tireless work, the fruit of a faith which becomes dialogue and sows peace in the contemplative style of Thomas Merton.



In these remarks, I have sought to present some of the richness of your cultural heritage, of the spirit of the American people.

 It is my desire that this spirit continue to develop and grow, so that as many young people as possible can inherit and dwell in a land which has inspired so many people to dream.



God bless America!

“Doing good” is a principle that unites all humanity, beyond the diversity of ideologies and religions, and creates the “culture of encounter” that is the foundation of peace: this is what Pope said at Mass this morning at the Domus Santae Martae, in the presence of employees of the Governorate of Vatican City.

 Cardinal Bechara Boutros Rai, Patriarch of Antioch of the Maronites, concelebrated at the Mass.



Wednesday’s Gospel speaks to us about the disciples who prevented a person from outside their group from doing good.

 “They complain,” the Pope said in his homily, because they say, “If he is not one of us, he cannot do good.

 If he is not of our party, he cannot do good.

” And Jesus corrects them: “Do not hinder him, he says, let him do good.

” The disciples, Pope Francis explains, “were a little intolerant,” closed off by the idea of possessing the truth, convinced that “those who do not have the truth, cannot do good.

” “This was wrong .

 .

 .

 Jesus broadens the horizon.

” Pope Francis said, “The root of this possibility of doing good – that we all have – is in creation”.



"The Lord created us in His image and likeness, and we are the image of the Lord, and He does good and all of us have this commandment at heart: do good and do not do evil.

 All of us.

 ‘But, Father, this is not Catholic!
 He cannot do good.

’ Yes, he can.

 He must.

 Not can: must!
 Because he has this commandment within him.

 Instead, this ‘closing off’ that imagines that those outside, everyone, cannot do good is a wall that leads to war and also to what some people throughout history have conceived of: killing in the name of God.

 That we can kill in the name of God.

 And that, simply, is blasphemy.

 To say that you can kill in the name of God is blasphemy.

”

“Instead,” the Pope continued, “the Lord has created us in His image and likeness, and has given us this commandment in the depths of our heart: do good and do not do evil”:

"The Lord has redeemed all of us, all of us, with the Blood of Christ: all of us, not just Catholics.

 Everyone!
 ‘Father, the atheists?

’ Even the atheists.

 Everyone!
 And this Blood makes us children of God of the first class!
 We are created children in the likeness of God and the Blood of Christ has redeemed us all!
 And we all have a duty to do good.

 And this commandment for everyone to do good, I think, is a beautiful path towards peace.

 If we, each doing our own part, if we do good to others, if we meet there, doing good, and we go slowly, gently, little by little, we will make that culture of encounter: we need that so much.

 We must meet one another doing good.

 ‘But I don’t believe, Father, I am an atheist!
’ But do good: we will meet one another there.

”

“Doing good” the Pope explained, is not a matter of faith: “It is a duty, it is an identity card that our Father has given to all of us, because He has made us in His image and likeness.

 And He does good, always.

”

This was the final prayer of Pope Francis:

Today is [the feast of] Santa Rita, Patron Saint of impossible things – but this seems impossible: let us ask of her this grace, this grace that all, all, all people would do good and that we would encounter one another in this work, which is a work of creation, like the creation of the Father.

 A work of the family, because we are all children of God, all of us, all of us!
 And God loves us, all of us!
 May Santa Rita grant us this grace, which seems almost impossible.

 Amen.


I greet all of you with great affection in the Lord.

 I am happy that we are able to meet in this Cathedral of the Transfiguration of the Lord.

 This house of prayer, along with many others, has been repaired thanks to the remarkable generosity of many people.

 It stands as an eloquent sign of the immense effort of rebuilding which you and your neighbors have undertaken in the wake of the devastation caused by Typhoon Yolanda.

 It is also a concrete reminder to all of us that, even amid disaster and suffering, our God is constantly at work, making all things new.



Many of you have suffered greatly, not only from the destruction caused by the storm, but from the loss of family members and friends.

 Today let us commend to God’s mercy all those who have died, and invoke his consolation and peace upon all who still grieve.

 May we remember in a particular way those among us whose pain makes it hard to see the way forward.

 At the same time, let us thank the Lord for all those who have labored in these months to clear away the rubble, to visit the sick and dying, to comfort the grieving and to bury the dead.

 Their goodness, and the generous aid which came from so many people throughout the world, are a real sign that God never abandons us!


Here, in a special way, I would like to thank the many priests and religious who responded with such overwhelming generosity to the desperate needs of the people of the areas hardest hit.

 By your presence and your charity, you bore witness to the beauty and truth of the Gospel.

 You made the Church present as a source of hope, healing and mercy.

 Together with so many of your neighbors, you also demonstrated the deep faith and the resilience of the Filipino people.

 The many stories of goodness and self-sacrifice which emerged from these dark days need to be remembered and passed down for future generations.



A few moments ago, I blessed the new Center for the Poor, which stands as another sign of the Church’s care and concern for our brothers and sisters in need.

 How many they are!
 And how much our Lord loves them!
 Today, from this place which has known such profound suffering and human need, I ask that even more be done for the poor.

 Above all, I ask that the poor throughout this country be treated fairly – that their dignity be respected, that political and economic policies be just and inclusive, that opportunities for employment and education be developed, and that obstacles to the delivery of social services be removed.

 Our treatment of the poor is the criterion on which each of us will be judged (cf.

 Mt 25:40, 45).

 I ask all of you, and all responsible for the good of society, to renew your commitment to social justice and the betterment of the poor, both here and in the Philippines as a whole.



Finally, I would like to say a word of sincere thanks to the young people present, including the seminarians and young religious.

 Many of you showed heroic generosity in the aftermath of the typhoon.

 I hope that you will always realize that true happiness comes from helping others, giving ourselves to them in self-sacrifice, mercy and compassion.

 In this way you will be a powerful force for the renewal of society, not only in the work of restoring buildings but more importantly, in building up God’s kingdom of holiness, justice and peace in your native land.



Dear priests and religious, dear families and friends, in this Cathedral of the Transfiguration of the Lord let us ask that our lives continue to be sustained and transfigured by the power of his resurrection.

 I commend all of you to the loving protection of Mary, Mother of the Church.

 May she obtain for you, and for all the beloved people of these lands, the Lord’s blessings of comfort, joy and peace.

 God bless you all!

Venerable Brothers in the Episcopate and in the Priesthood!
 Distinguished Authorities!
 Dear brothers and sisters!
 Thank you for coming in such large numbers to this last General Audience of my pontificate.



Like the Apostle Paul in the biblical text that we have heard, I feel in my heart the paramount duty to thank God, who guides the Church and makes her grow: who sows His Word and thus nourishes the faith in His people.

 At this moment my spirit reaches out to embrace the whole Church throughout the world, and I thank God for the “news” that in these years of Petrine ministry I have been able to receive regarding the faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and the charity that circulates in the body of the Church – charity that makes the Church to live in love – and of the hope that opens for us the way towards the fullness of life, and directs us towards the heavenly homeland.



I feel I [ought to] carry everyone in prayer, in a present that is God’s, where I recall every meeting, every voyage, every pastoral visit.

 I gather everyone and every thing in prayerful recollection, in order to entrust them to the Lord: in order that we might have full knowledge of His will, with every wisdom and spiritual understanding, and in order that we might comport ourselves in a manner that is worthy of Him, of His, bearing fruit in every good work (cf.

 Col 1:9-10).



At this time, I have within myself a great trust [in God], because I know – all of us know – that the Gospel’s word of truth is the strength of the Church: it is her life.

 The Gospel purifies and renews: it bears fruit wherever the community of believers hears and welcomes the grace of God in truth and lives in charity.

 This is my faith, this is my joy.



When, almost eight years ago, on April 19th, [2005], I agreed to take on the Petrine ministry, I held steadfast in this certainty, which has always accompanied me.

 In that moment, as I have already stated several times, the words that resounded in my heart were: “Lord, what do you ask of me?

 It a great weight that You place on my shoulders, but, if You ask me, at your word I will throw out the nets, sure that you will guide me” – and the Lord really has guided me.

 He has been close to me: daily could I feel His presence.

 [These years] have been a stretch of the Church’s pilgrim way, which has seen moments joy and light, but also difficult moments.

 I have felt like St.

 Peter with the Apostles in the boat on the Sea of Galilee: the Lord has given us many days of sunshine and gentle breeze, days in which the catch has been abundant; [then] there have been times when the seas were rough and the wind against us, as in the whole history of the Church it has ever been - and the Lord seemed to sleep.

 Nevertheless, I always knew that the Lord is in the barque, that the barque of the Church is not mine, not ours, but His - and He shall not let her sink.

 It is He, who steers her: to be sure, he does so also through men of His choosing, for He desired that it be so.

 This was and is a certainty that nothing can tarnish.

 It is for this reason, that today my heart is filled with gratitude to God, for never did He leave me or the Church without His consolation, His light, His love.



We are in the Year of Faith, which I desired in order to strengthen our own faith in God in a context that seems to push faith more and more toward the margins of life.

 I would like to invite everyone to renew firm trust in the Lord.

 I would like that we all, entrust ourselves as children to the arms of God, and rest assured that those arms support us and us to walk every day, even in times of struggle.

 I would like everyone to feel loved by the God who gave His Son for us and showed us His boundless love.

 I want everyone to feel the joy of being Christian.

 In a beautiful prayer to be recited daily in the morning says, “I adore you, my God, I love you with all my heart.

 I thank You for having created me, for having made me a Christian.

” Yes, we are happy for the gift of faith: it is the most precious good, that no one can take from us!
 Let us thank God for this every day, with prayer and with a coherent Christian life.

 God loves us, but He also expects that we love Him!


At this time, however, it is not only God, whom I desire to thank.

 A Pope is not alone in guiding St.

 Peter’s barque, even if it is his first responsibility – and I have not ever felt myself alone in bearing either the joys or the weight of the Petrine ministry.

 The Lord has placed next to me many people, who, with generosity and love for God and the Church, have helped me and been close to me.

 First of all you, dear Brother Cardinals: your wisdom, your counsels, your friendship, were all precious to me.

 My collaborators, starting with my Secretary of State, who accompanied me faithfully over the years, the Secretariat of State and the whole Roman Curia, as well as all those who, in various areas, give their service to the Holy See: the many faces which never emerge, but remain in the background, in silence, in their daily commitment, with a spirit of faith and humility.

 They have been for me a sure and reliable support.

 A special thought [goes] to the Church of Rome, my diocese!
 I can not forget the Brothers in the Episcopate and in the Priesthood, the consecrated persons and the entire People of God: in pastoral visits, in public encounters, at Audiences, in traveling, I have always received great care and deep affection; I also loved each and every one, without exception, with that pastoral charity which is the heart of every shepherd, especially the Bishop of Rome, the Successor of the Apostle Peter.

 Every day I carried each of you in my prayers, with the father's heart.



I wish my greetings and my thanks to reach everyone: the heart of a Pope expands to [embrace] the whole world.

 I would like to express my gratitude to the Diplomatic Corps accredited to the Holy See, which makes present the great family of nations.

 Here I also think of all those who work for good communication, whom I thank for their important service.



At this point I would like to offer heartfelt thanks to all the many people throughout the whole world, who, in recent weeks have sent me moving tokens of concern, friendship and prayer.

 Yes, the Pope is never alone: now I experience this [truth] again in a way so great as to touch my very heart.

 The Pope belongs to everyone, and so many people feel very close to him.

 It’s true that I receive letters from the world's greatest figures - from the Heads of State, religious leaders, representatives of the world of culture and so on.

 I also receive many letters from ordinary people who write to me simply from their heart and let me feel their affection, which is born of our being together in Christ Jesus, in the Church.

 These people do not write me as one might write, for example, to a prince or a great figure one does not know.

 They write as brothers and sisters, sons and daughters, with the sense of very affectionate family ties.

 Here, one can touch what the Church is – not an organization, not an association for religious or humanitarian purposes, but a living body, a community of brothers and sisters in the Body of Jesus Christ, who unites us all.

 To experience the Church in this way and almost be able to touch with one’s hands the power of His truth and His love, is a source of joy, in a time in which many speak of its decline.



In recent months, I felt that my strength had decreased, and I asked God with insistence in prayer to enlighten me with His light to make me take the right decision – not for my sake, but for the good of the Church.

 I have taken this step in full awareness of its severity and also its novelty, but with a deep peace of mind.

 Loving the Church also means having the courage to make difficult, trying choices, having ever before oneself the good of the Church and not one’s own.



Here allow me to return once again to April 19, 2005.

 The gravity of the decision was precisely in the fact that from that moment on I was committed always and forever by the Lord.

 Always – he, who assumes the Petrine ministry no longer has any privacy.

 He belongs always and totally to everyone, to the whole Church.

 His life is, so to speak, totally deprived of the private sphere.

 I have felt, and I feel even in this very moment, that one receives one’s life precisely when he offers it as a gift.

 I said before that many people who love the Lord also love the Successor of Saint Peter and are fond of him, that the Pope has truly brothers and sisters, sons and daughters all over the world, and that he feels safe in the embrace of their communion, because he no longer belongs to himself, but he belongs to all and all are truly his own.



The “always” is also a “forever” - there is no returning to private life.

 My decision to forgo the exercise of active ministry, does not revoke this.

 I do not return to private life, to a life of travel, meetings, receptions, conferences and so on.

 I do not abandon the cross, but remain in a new way near to the Crucified Lord.

 I no longer wield the power of the office for the government of the Church, but in the service of prayer I remain, so to speak, within St.

 Peter’s bounds.

 St.

 Benedict, whose name I bear as Pope, shall be a great example in this for me.

 He showed us the way to a life which, active or passive, belongs wholly to the work of God.



I thank each and every one of you for the respect and understanding with which you have welcomed this important decision.

 I continue to accompany the Church on her way through prayer and reflection, with the dedication to the Lord and to His Bride, which I have hitherto tried to live daily and that I would live forever.

 I ask you to remember me before God, and above all to pray for the Cardinals, who are called to so important a task, and for the new Successor of Peter, that the Lord might accompany him with the light and the power of His Spirit.



Let us invoke the maternal intercession of Mary, Mother of God and of the Church, that she might accompany each of us and the whole ecclesial community: to her we entrust ourselves, with deep trust.



Dear friends!
 God guides His Church, maintains her always, and especially in difficult times.

 Let us never lose this vision of faith, which is the only true vision of the way of the Church and the world.

 In our heart, in the heart of each of you, let there be always the joyous certainty that the Lord is near, that He does not abandon us, that He is near to us and that He surrounds us with His love.

 Thank you!

Dear Brothers, I have convoked you to this Consistory, not only for the three canonizations, but also to communicate to you a decision of great importance for the life of the Church.

 After having repeatedly examined my conscience before God, I have come to the certainty that my strengths, due to an advanced age, are no longer suited to an adequate exercise of the Petrine ministry.

 I am well aware that this ministry, due to its essential spiritual nature, must be carried out not only with words and deeds, but no less with prayer and suffering.

 However, in today’s world, subject to so many rapid changes and shaken by questions of deep relevance for the life of faith, in order to govern the bark of Saint Peter and proclaim the Gospel, both strength of mind and body are necessary, strength which in the last few months, has deteriorated in me to the extent that I have had to recognize my incapacity to adequately fulfill the ministry entrusted to me.

 For this reason, and well aware of the seriousness of this act, with full freedom I declare that I renounce the ministry of Bishop of Rome, Successor of Saint Peter, entrusted to me by the Cardinals on 19 April 2005, in such a way, that as from 28 February 2013, at 20:00 hours, the See of Rome, the See of Saint Peter, will be vacant and a Conclave to elect the new Supreme Pontiff will have to be convoked by those whose competence it is.



Dear Brothers, I thank you most sincerely for all the love and work with which you have supported me in my ministry and I ask pardon for all my defects.

 And now, let us entrust the Holy Church to the care of Our Supreme Pastor, Our Lord Jesus Christ, and implore his holy Mother Mary, so that she may assist the Cardinal Fathers with her maternal solicitude, in electing a new Supreme Pontiff.

 With regard to myself, I wish to also devotedly serve the Holy Church of God in the future through a life dedicated to prayer.


I offer a warm and affectionate greeting to the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors who have joined me for this, my last General Audience
Like Saint Paul, whose words we heard earlier, my heart is filled with thanksgiving to God who ever watches over his Church and her growth in faith and love, and I embrace all of you with joy and gratitude
During this Year of Faith, we have been called to renew our joyful trust in the Lord’s presence in our lives and in the life of the Church.

 I am personally grateful for his unfailing love and guidance in the eight years since I accepted his call to serve as the Successor of Peter
I am also deeply grateful for the understanding, support and prayers of so many of you, not only here in Rome, but also throughout the world.

 The decision I have made, after much prayer, is the fruit of a serene trust in God’s will and a deep love of Christ’s Church
I will continue to accompany the Church with my prayers, and I ask each of you to pray for me and for the new Pope
In union with Mary and all the saints, let us entrust ourselves in faith and hope to God, who continues to watch over our lives and to guide the journey of the Church and our world along the paths of history
I commend all of you, with great affection, to his loving care, asking Him to strengthen you in the hope which opens our hearts to the fullness of life that he alone can give
To you and your families, I impart my blessing
Thank you
Like the Apostle Paul in the Biblical text that we have heard, I feel in my heart that I have to especially thank God who guides and builds up the Church, who plants His Word and thus nourishes the faith in His People.

 At this moment my heart expands and embraces the whole Church throughout the world and I thank God for the 'news' that, in these years of my Petrine ministry, I have received about the faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and for the love that truly circulates in the Body of the Church, making it to live in the love and the hope that opens us to and guides us towards the fullness of life, towards our heavenly homeland.



I feel that I am carrying everyone with me in prayer in this God-given moment when I am collecting every meeting, every trip, every pastoral visit.

 I am gathering everyone and everything in prayer to entrust it to the Lord: so that we may be filled with the knowledge of His will through all spiritual wisdom and understanding in order to live in a manner worthy of the Lord and His love, bearing fruit in every good work (cf.

 Col 1:9-10).



At this moment I have great confidence because I know, we all know, that the Gospel's Word of truth is the strength of the Church; it is her life.

 The Gospel purifies and renews, bearing fruit, wherever the community of believers hears it and welcomes God's grace in truth and in love.

 This is my confidence, this is my joy.



When, on 19 April almost eight years ago I accepted to take on the Petrine ministry, I had the firm certainty that has always accompanied me: this certainty for the life of the Church from the Word of God.

 At that moment, as I have already expressed many times, the words that resounded in my heart were: Lord, what do You ask of me?

 It is a great weight that You are placing on my shoulders but, if You ask it of me, I will cast my nets at your command, confident that You will guide me, even with all my weaknesses.

 And eight years later I can say that the Lord has guided me.

 He has been close to me.

 I have felt His presence every day.

 It has been a stretch of the Church's path that has had moments of joy and light, but also difficult moments.

 I felt like St.

 Peter and the Apostles in the boat on the See of Galilee.

 The Lord has given us many days of sunshine and light breezes, days when the fishing was plentiful, but also times when the water was rough and the winds against us, just as throughout the whole history of the Church, when the Lord seemed to be sleeping.

 But I always knew that the Lord is in that boat and I always knew that the boat of the Church is not mine, not ours, but is His.

 And the Lord will not let it sink.

 He is the one who steers her, of course also through those He has chosen because that is how He wanted it.

 This was and is a certainty that nothing can tarnish.

 And that is why my heart today is filled with gratitude to God, because He never left—the whole Church or me—without His consolation, His light, or His love.



We are in the Year of Faith, which I desired precisely in order to strengthen our faith in God in a context that seems to relegate it more and more to the background.

 I would like to invite everyone to renew their firm trust in the Lord, to entrust ourselves like children to God's arms, certain that those arms always hold us up and are what allow us to walk forward each day, even when it is a struggle.

 I would like everyone to feel beloved of that God who gave His Son for us and who has shown us His boundless love.

 I would like everyone to feel the joy of being Christian.

 In a beautiful prayer, which can be recited every morning, say: 'I adore you, my God and I love you with all my heart.

 Thank you for having created me, for having made me Christian.

.

.

' Yes, we are happy for the gift of faith.

 It is the most precious thing, which no one can take from us!
 Let us thank the Lord for this every day, with prayer and with a coherent Christian life.

 God loves us, but awaits us to also love Him!


It is not only God who I wish to thank at this time.

 A pope is not alone in guiding Peter's barque, even if it is his primary responsibility.

 I have never felt alone in bearing the joy and the weight of the Petrine ministry.

 The Lord has placed at my side so many people who, with generosity and love for God and the Church, have helped me and been close to me.

 First of all, you, dear Brother Cardinals: your wisdom, your advice, and your friendship have been precious to me.

 My collaborators, starting with my secretary of state who has accompanied me faithfully over the years; the Secretariat of State and the whole of the Roman Curia, as well as all those who, in their various areas, serve the Holy See.

 There are many faces that are never seen, remaining in obscurity, but precisely in their silence, in their daily dedication in a spirit of faith and humility, they were a sure and reliable support to me.

 A special thought goes to the Church of Rome, my diocese!
 I cannot forget my Brothers in the episcopate and in the priesthood, consecrated persons, and the entire People of God.

 In my pastoral visits, meetings, audiences, and trips I always felt great care and deep affection, but I have also loved each and every one of you, without exception, with that pastoral love that is the heart of every pastor, especially the Bishop of Rome, the Successor of the Apostle Peter.

 Every day I held each of you in prayer, with a father's heart.



I wish to send my greetings and my thanks to all: a pope's heart extends to the whole world.

 And I would like to express my gratitude to the Diplomatic Corps accredited to the Holy See, which makes the great family of Nations present here.

 Here I am also thinking of all those who work for good communication and I thank them for their important service.



At this point I would also like to wholeheartedly thank all of the many people around the world who, in recent weeks, have sent me touching tokens of concern, friendship, and prayer.

 Yes, the Pope is never alone.

 I feel this again now in such a great way that it touches my heart.

 The Pope belongs to everyone and many people feel very close to him.

 It's true that I receive letters from the world's notables—from heads of states, from religious leaders, from representatives of the world of culture, etc.

 But I also receive many letters from ordinary people who write to me simply from their hearts and make me feel their affection, which is born of our being together with Christ Jesus, in the Church.

 These people do not write to me the way one would write, for example, to a prince or a dignitary that they don't know.

 They write to me as brothers and sisters or as sons and daughters, with the sense of a very affectionate family tie.

 In this you can touch what the Church is—not an organization, not an association for religious or humanitarian ends, but a living body, a communion of brothers and sisters in the Body of Jesus Christ who unites us all.

 Experiencing the Church in this way and being able to almost touch with our hands the strength of His truth and His love is a reason for joy at a time when many are speaking of its decline.

 See how the Church is alive today!


In these last months I have felt that my strength had diminished and I asked God earnestly in prayer to enlighten me with His light to make me make the right decision, not for my own good, but for the good of the Church.

 I have taken this step in full awareness of its seriousness and also its newness, but with a profound peace of mind.

 Loving the Church also means having the courage to make difficult, agonized choices, always keeping in mind the good of the Church, not of oneself.



Allow me here to return once again to 19 April, 2005.

 The gravity of the decision lay precisely in the fact that, from that moment on, I was always and for always engaged by the Lord.

 Always—whoever assumes the Petrine ministry no longer has any privacy.

 He belongs always and entirely to everyone, to the whole Church.

 His life, so to speak, is totally deprived of its private dimension.

 I experienced, and I am experiencing it precisely now, that one receives life precisely when they give it.

 Before I said that many people who love the Lord also love St.

 Peter's Successor and are fond of him; that the Pope truly has brothers and sisters, sons and daughters all over the world and that he feels safe in the embrace of their communion; because he no longer belongs to himself but he belongs to all and all belong to him.



'Always' is also 'forever'--there is no return to private life.

 My decision to renounce the active exercise of the ministry does not revoke this.

 I am not returning to private life, to a life of trips, meetings, receptions, conferences, etc.

 I am not abandoning the cross, but am remaining beside the Crucified Lord in a new way.

 I no longer bear the power of the office for the governance of the Church, but I remain in the service of prayer, within St.

 Peter's paddock, so to speak.

 St.

 Benedict, whose name I bear as Pope, will be a great example to me in this.

 He has shown us the way for a life that, active or passive, belongs wholly to God's work.



I also thank each and every one of you for the respect and understanding with which you have received this important decision.

 I will continue to accompany the Church's journey through prayer and reflection, with the dedication to the Lord and His Bride that I have tried to live every day up to now and that I want to always live.

 I ask you to remember me to God, and above all to pray for the Cardinals who are called to such an important task, and for the new Successor of the Apostle Peter.

 Many the Lord accompany him with the light and strength of His Spirit.



We call upon the maternal intercession of Mary, the Mother of God and of the Church, that she might accompany each of us and the entire ecclesial community.

 We entrust ourselves to her with deep confidence.



Dear friends!
 God guides His Church, always sustaining her even and especially in difficult times.

 Let us never lose this vision of faith, which is the only true vision of the path of the Church and of the world.

 In our hearts, in the heart of each one of you, may there always be the joyous certainty that the Lord is beside us, that He does not abandon us, that He is near and embraces us with His love.

 Thank you.


Thank you, friends!
 I am honored by your invitation to talk to you.

 I want to take this
opportunity first to say “thank you” for what you do — for all your service to the
Church and your witness to our society.


It’s hard to believe that it’s been 20 years since Evangelium Vitae, the magna carta of
the modern pro-life movement.

 But St.

 John Paul II’s words still ring true: “The Gospel
of life is at the heart of Jesus’ message.

”i
When I became Archbishop of Los Angeles a few years ago, I expanded the portfolio of
the Archdiocese’s Justice and Peace Office — so that it is now the Office of Life,
Justice and Peace.


I did that because I believe the Gospel of life is not only the heart of the Gospel — it’s
also the heart of the Church’s social witness.


Everything we do.

 All the Church’s works of mercy and charity.

 All our advocacy for
the unborn and the elderly, the poor, the immigrant, the worker, the prisoner and the
sick.


Everything we do is rooted in the truth of the Gospel.

 The beautiful truth that every
human life matters — because every human life is sacred and created by the loving plan
of God.


So for me, and I know for my brother bishops, the pro-life ministry is vital to the
Church’s mission.


So thank you for your work and witness to the Gospel of life!

As many of you know, by the grace of God we had a pro-life victory recently in
California.

 Earlier this month, the State legislature decided to withdraw a bill that would
have legalized assisted suicide.


It’s a temporary victory, for sure.

 We expect to see the measure come back in January
or later next year in a ballot proposition.

 But for now it is stopped.


It is no secret that there was big money and powerful interests behind this legislation,
and nobody thought we could win.


But that what’s encouraging to me.

 Despite the odds and all the political pressure, we
were still able to engage legislators on this complicated issue and help them to see our
concerns.


The Church, of course, was not alone.

 We were part of a broad, diverse coalition that
included doctors and health care professionals, persons with disabilities, advocates for
the poor, leaders in our African American and immigrant communities, and others.


Working together, I think we made a persuasive case — that assisted suicide would
have dangerous implications for the poor and those who don’t have adequate access to
health care.


So I think that our success is a hopeful sign for the future.

 And that’s what I want to talk
about this afternoon.


In the United States, we are a long way from the “new culture of life” that St.

 John Paul
called us to build.

ii I think we are all aware of that — probably more and more every
day.


But that’s our challenge.

 It’s not only to save and protect the lives of the weak and
defenseless.

 That’s absolutely urgent.


We have to fight every day for the rights and dignity of every human life.

 Every life, at
every stage and in every condition.

 From the moment life is conceived in the womb,
until the moment life reaches its natural end in death.


But as we do that, we face a deeper challenge — that is spiritual, moral and cultural.

 In
fact, I would say this is one of the great challenges of the new evangelization in our
country.

 And that is the task of transforming this culture — turning it from the darkness
of death to the light of life.


We are living in a culture that is deeply confused and conflicted about the meaning of
creation and the meaning of human life.


And so we find ourselves more and more indifferent to the cruelty and injustice that we
see all around us.


This includes grave crimes against human life — widespread abortion at every stage,
even in the final hours of a pregnancy; experimentation with human embryos; the
“quiet” euthanasia of the old and sick.


But we can also talk about the injustice of racial discrimination; unemployment and
homelessness; the pollution of our environment — especially in poor and minority
communities.


We can talk about the violence in our neighborhoods; the epidemic of drugs; the crisis
of hope among our young people.

 The scandalous conditions in our prisons; the death
penalty.


One issue that we deal with every day in Los Angeles — the heart-breaking
deportations of fathers and mothers; whole families, including young children, being
held in immigration jails; people dying in the deserts outside our borders — all because
of our broken immigration system and our failure to fix it.


I am not trying to say that all of these issues are “equal.

” They are not.

 And we always
need to be clear about that.


The fundamental injustice in our society is the killing of innocent unborn life through
abortion and the killing of the sick and defenseless through euthanasia and assisted
suicide.


Abortion and euthanasia raise basic questions of human rights and social justice in our
society.

 Questions of what kind of society we are and what kind of people we want to
be.


So the Church must proclaim, in every time and place — that the right to life is the
foundation of every other right and the true foundation of justice and peace in society.


If the child in the womb has no right to be born, if the sick and the old have no right to
be taken care of — then there is no solid foundation to defend anyone’s human rights.


But my friends, we need to acknowledge that the evils of abortion and euthanasia exist
in a wider, cultural context.


We need to recognize that we are living in a culture that has become totally secularized
and de-Christianized.


In my opinion, this is the great test for the Church in the 21st century.

 How do we live
and love and work and create; how do we raise our families and carry out our Christian
mission — in a culture that has no need for God and has no tolerance for people who believe in God?

 A culture that is more and more hostile to the Church and her teachings
and institutions.


This is the test for us.

 And we are living in a culture that has taken on a “godless”
shape.

 And what we see throughout our culture — all the cruelty, the injustice and
indifference — all of it is rooted in our society’s abandonment of God.


Because without God we become strangers to ourselves.

 Without God we don’t know
who we are, or where we come from, or what we are here for.


That’s the issue at a personal, individual level.

 At the level of society, a society that no
longer believes in a Creator loses the meaning of creation, loses the reason for human
solidarity and community.


In a society without God, the human person becomes “nothing special,” nothing sacred.


The value of a human life is judged according to whether it is “productive” or
“efficient.

”
We see this utilitarian mentality at work everywhere in our society — especially in our
cultural debates about euthanasia, abortion, embryo research, and contraception.


There is a growing assumption in our society that some lives do not matter as much as
others — that some lives are not worth society’s “investment,” not worth paying for or
protecting.


We also see that some lives are judged to be “disposable” precisely because they are no
longer “useful” — because they are too old, too sick, or too weak.

 Lives that cause
inconvenience or become a burden to others — can be ignored or eliminated.


My friends, it’s not enough for us to criticize the cruelty of this culture.

 It’s not enough
for us to decry a “culture of death.

”
Our challenge as Christians is to change and convert this culture!

We have to call our society once more to rediscover the sanctity, the dignity and the
transcendent destiny of the human person, who is created in the image of the Creator.


We need to show our neighbors — by our words and by our actions — that every
human life is sacred and precious, because every human life is created out of love by
God, who calls us to a personal relationship, to the vocation of being God’s children.


The Servant of God Dorothy Day, the great apostle to America, tells the story about
how one day she was walking down the streets of New York City praying her Rosary.


She was on her way to a meeting of some union workers who were on strike.


And this is what happened, she said:
“As I waited for the traffic light to change … suddenly like a bright light, like a joyful
thought, the words ‘Our Father’ pierced my heart.

 To all those who were about me, to
all the passersby, to the longshoremen idling about the corner, black and white, to the
striking seamen I was going to see, I was akin.

 For we were all children of a common
Father, all creatures of one Creator.

 And Catholic or Protestant, Jew or Christian,
Communist or non-Communist, were bound together by this tie.


“We cannot escape the recognition of the fact that we are all brothers.

 Whether or not a
man believes in Jesus Christ, his incarnation, his life here with us, his crucifixion and
resurrection; whether or not a man believes in God, the fact remains that we are all the
children of one Father.

”iii
My friends, in these words, we have a beautiful summary of the Gospel of life, which is
the beautiful truth of God’s plan for creation and for every life.


As you know, my brother bishops and I in the United States are promoting Dorothy
Day’s cause for canonization.


And I believe she is a powerful witness to the Gospel of life.

 She shows us a way to live
in this culture that denies God, and a way to confront the injustice and poverty and
violence that we find in this culture.


Dorothy Day knew personally the tragedy of abortion and also the despair that leads
people to try suicide.

 But she also discovered the power of God’s tender mercies —
which can heal every wound and bring new life out of sin and death.


In our mission of the new evangelization, we need to learn from Dorothy Day’s
profound critique of our society and culture.


She called us to examine our conscience.

 She asked what does Christ’s command to
love our neighbor mean, when we are living in comfort and our neighbor does not have
what he needs to live?

iv
She called us to overturn the false idols in our lives and in our society — the idols of the
flesh and the idols of the marketplace; the idols of individualism, nationalism, and
racism.


She did not speak much publicly about abortion.

 But when she did, she wrote with
empathy and compassion for the pain of the women who were caught up in it.


In her tender approach, she gives us a model for our own preaching and ministry —
teaching us how to speak on this delicate issue in a way that brings forgiveness,
reconciliation and healing.


But Dorothy Day also reminded us that as a public policy — abortion and birth control
are “social sins” — crimes against creation and our common humanity.

 She believed
that “birth control and abortion are genocide” against the poor and minority peoples.


These are strong words.

 But they have credibility because of her own experience with
abortion and her lifetime spent at society’s margins, serving the poorest of the poor.


Dorothy Day also gave us a beautiful line that should become our pro-life motto: “Make
room for children, don’t do away with them.

”v
My friends, Dorothy Day reminds us always that the Gospel of life must be proclaimed
in words of love and works of mercy.


And as she did, we also have to find ways to make connections, to build bridges and
friendships with others in our community.

 The purpose, of course, is to foster a spirit of
compassion and caring and to bring people together in the cause of life and human
dignity.


We have been trying to do that in various ways in Los Angeles.


One example: This year, held our first annual “march for life” to mark the Roe v.

 Wade
decision — it’s the first time this has been done in Los Angeles.

 We called the event
OneLifeLA.


It was a joy-filled, beautiful family-centered picnic and celebration, with more than
15,000 people.

 We marched through the streets of downtown L.

A.

 — beginning at
L.

A.

’s first church, which dates back to the mission era, and we ended up in the park
outside City Hall where we held a day-long program.


We designed a program filled with inspiring testimonies drawn from a wide variety of
individuals and groups working in our community to build a culture of life.

 Stories of
hope and courage; stories of love and self-sacrifice.


And the message was clear — that God’s love embraces every life, and especially those
lives that are vulnerable and weak, those who cannot care for themselves.


My friends, let me conclude these reflections by looking ahead to the visit of Pope
Francis to the United States in September.


The Pope’s visit is going to be special for those of us from California, and also for
Hispanic Catholics throughout the hemisphere.

 Because the Pope is going to be
canonizing Blessed Junípero Serra, the great Franciscan missionary who is the founder
of California and one of the spiritual founders of America.


t’s kind of awesome to think about it — Father Junipero Serra will be the first
American saint canonized on American soil.

 He is also the first Hispanic saint from this
country.

 And he will be canonized by the first Pope from the New World.


And in my prayer and preparation for the Pope’s visit, I have been reading and
reflecting a lot on the words and witness of Father Junipero.


And it strikes me that at the dawn of the first evangelization of our country, we find in
Father Junípero and his fellow missionaries — a passionate commitment to human life
and human dignity.


In his writings, we find deep love for the Native peoples he had come to evangelize.

 We
find beautiful writing on the environment and the natural world, and important
reflections on social justice and human rights.


Father Junípero was a defender and protector of the Native peoples, and especially
women — who were subject to systematic violence at the hands of the Spanish military.


At a time when many still denied the “humanity” of the Native peoples, Father Junípero
drew up a “bill of rights” that was a radical call for justice and the promotion of integral
human development.


Father Junípero is also important in the history of the Gospel of life.

 Because I believe
he was the first person in the Americas — and maybe in all of the universal Church —
to make a theological and moral argument against the death penalty.


It’s a great story, and I will leave you with it.


It goes like this: In 1775, the Natives attacked the San Diego Mission.

 They burned the
whole place down and they tortured and killed one of the Franciscans there, a good
friend of Fray Junípero.


Of course, the military wanted to arrest the Natives and execute them.


But Father Junípero wrote repeated letters urging the authorities to spare the killers,
even though they were guilty of the crime.

 In his appeals, he said some truly remarkable
things about human dignity, human rights and the mercy of God.


Let me leave you with one quote: “Let the murderer live so he can be saved, which is
the purpose of our coming here and the reason for forgiving him.

”vi
My friends, this is our “purpose” too in the new evangelization.

 We are called to follow
in the path of the missionaries and saints of the Americas and to proclaim the Gospel of
life, which is the heart of message of Jesus.

 This is the beautiful challenge, the beautify duty we have.

 We are called to save lives and to spread God’s mercy and forgiveness,
his healing and peace.


So let us to continue in our mission — to build the new culture of life in our times.

 Let
us work to open people’s eyes to the beauty of creation, to the beauty of every human
life, and to the source of all life in the love of our Creator.


And may Our Lady of Guadalupe, Mother of the Americas and Mother of Life, watch
over all of us in her tender love!

LA STAMPA: What does Christmas say to people today?


POPE FRANCIS: Christmas is God’s meeting with his people.

 It is also a consolation, a mystery of consolation.

 It speaks of tenderness and hope.

 When God meets us he tells us two things.

 The first thing he says is: have hope.

 God always opens doors, he never closes them.

 He is the father who opens doors for us.

 The second thing he says is: don’t be afraid of tenderness.

 When Christians forget about hope and tenderness they become a cold Church, that loses its sense of direction and is held back by ideologies and worldly attitudes, whereas God’s simplicity tells you: go forward, I am a Father who caresses you.

 Throughout my life as a priest, going to the parish, I have always sought to transmit this tenderness, particularly to children and the elderly.

 It does me good and it makes me think of the tenderness God has towards us.

”

Christmas is often presented as a sugar-coated fairy tale.

 But God is born into a world where there is also a great deal of suffering and misery.


The message announced to us in the Gospels is a message of joy.

 The evangelists described a joyful event to us.

 They do not discuss about the unjust world and how God could be born into such a world.

 All this is the fruit of our own contemplations: the poor, the child that is born into a precarious situation.

 The (first) Christmas was not a condemnation of social injustice and poverty; it was an announcement of joy.

 Everything else are conclusions that we draw.

 Some are correct, others are less so and others still are ideologized.

 Christmas is joy, religious joy, God’s joy, an inner joy of light and peace.

 When you are unable or in a human situation that does not allow you to comprehend this joy, then one experiences this feast with a worldly joyfulness.

 But there is a difference between profound joy and worldly joyfulness.



This is your first Christmas in a world marked by conflict and war.

.

.


God never gives someone a gift they are not capable of receiving.

 In a world afflicted by war, this Christmas makes me think of God’s patience.

 The Bible clearly shows that God’s main virtue is that He is love.

 He waits for us; he never tires of waiting for us.

 He gives us the gift and then waits for us.

 This happens in the life of each and every one of us.

 There are those who ignore him.

 But God is patient and the peace and serenity of Christmas Eve is a reflection of God’s patience toward us.



This coming January marks the 50th anniversary of Paul VI’s historic visit to the Holy Land.

 Will you go?


Christmas always makes us think of Bethlehem, and Bethlehem is a precise point in the Holy Land where Jesus lived.

 On Christmas night, I think above all with the Christians who live there, of those who are in difficulty, of the many people who have had to leave that land because of various problems.

 But Bethlehem is still Bethlehem.

 God arrived at a specific time in a specific land; that is where God’s tenderness and grace appeared.

 We cannot think of Christmas without thinking of the Holy land.

 Fifty years ago, Paul VI had the courage to go out and go there and this marked the beginning of the era of papal journeys.

 I would also like to go there, to meet my brother Bartholomew, the Patriarch of Constantinople, and commemorate this 50th anniversary with him, renewing that embrace which took place between Pope Montini and Athenagoras in Jerusalem, in 1964.

 We are preparing for this.



You have met with seriously ill children on more than one occasion.

 What do you have to say about this innocent suffering?


One man who has been a life mentor for me is Dostoievski and his explicit and implicit question “Why do children suffer?

” has always stirred my heart.

 There is no explanation.

 This image comes to mind: at a particular point of his or her life, a child “wakes up,” doesn’t understand much and feels threatened, he or she starts asking their mom or dad questions.

 This is the “why” age.

 But when the child asks a question, he or she doesn’t wait to hear the full answer, they immediately start bombarding you with more “whys.

” What they are really looking for, more than an explanation, is a reassuring look on their parent’s face.

 When I come across a suffering child, the only prayer that comes to mind is the “why” prayer.

 Why Lord?

 He doesn’t explain anything to me.

 But I can feel Him looking at me.

 So I can say: You know why, I don’t, and You won’t tell me, but You’re looking at me and I trust You, Lord, I trust your gaze.



Speaking of children’s suffering, we can’t forget the tragedy of those who are suffering from hunger.


With all the food that is left over and thrown away we could feed so many.

 If we were able to stop wasting and start recycling food, world hunger would diminish greatly.

 I was struck by one statistic, which says ten thousand children die of hunger each day across the world.

 There are so many children that cry because they are hungry.

 At the Wednesday General Audience the other day there was a young mother behind one of the barriers with a baby that was just a few month's old.

 The child was crying its eyes out as I came past.

 The mother was caressing it.

 I said to her: madam, I think the child’s hungry.

 “Yes, it’s probably time…” she replied.

 “Please give it something to eat!
” I said.

 She was shy and didn’t want to breastfeed in public, while the Pope was passing.

 I wish to say the same to humanity: give people something to eat!
 That woman had milk to give to her child; we have enough food in the world to feed everyone.

 If we work with humanitarian organizations and are able to agree all together not to waste food, sending it instead to those who need it, we could do so much to help solve the problem of hunger in the world.



Some of the passages in the “Evangelii Gaudium” attracted the criticism of ultraconservatives in the US.

 As a Pope, what does it feel like to be called a “Marxist”?


The Marxist ideology is wrong.

 But I have met many Marxists in my life who are good people, so I don’t feel offended.



The most striking part of the Exhortation was where it refers to an economy that “kills.

"
There is nothing in the Exhortation that cannot be found in the social Doctrine of the Church.

 I wasn’t speaking from a technical point of view, what I was trying to do was to give a picture of what is going on.

 The only specific quote I used was the one regarding the “trickle-down theories” which assume that economic growth, encouraged by a free market, will inevitably succeed in bringing about greater justice and social inclusiveness in the world.

 The promise was that when the glass was full, it would overflow, benefitting the poor.

 But what happens instead, is that when the glass is full, it magically gets bigger, and nothing ever comes out for the poor.

 This was the only reference to a specific theory.

 I was not, I repeat, speaking from a technical point of view but according to the Church’s social doctrine.

 This does not mean being a Marxist.



Is Christian unity a priority for you?


Yes, for me ecumenism is a priority.

 Today there is an ecumenism of blood.

 In some countries they kill Christians for wearing a cross or having a Bible and before they kill them they do not ask them whether they are Anglican, Lutheran, Catholic or Orthodox.

 Their blood is mixed.

 To those who kill, we are Christians.

 We are united in blood, even though we have not yet managed to take necessary steps towards unity between us and perhaps the time has not yet come.

 Unity is a gift that we need to ask for.

 I knew a parish priest in Hamburg who was dealing with the beatification cause of a Catholic priest guillotined by the Nazis for teaching children the catechism.

 After him, in the list of condemned individuals, was a Lutheran pastor who was killed for the same reason.

 Their blood was mixed.

 The parish priest told me he had gone to the bishop and said to him: “I will continue to deal with the cause, but both of their causes, not just the Catholic priest’s.

” This is what ecumenism of blood is.

 It still exists today; you just need to read the newspapers.

 Those who kill Christians don’t ask for your identity card to see which Church you were baptized in.



In the Apostolic Exhortation you called for prudent and bold pastoral choices regarding the sacraments.

 What were you referring to?


When I speak of prudence I do not think of it in terms of an attitude that paralyzes but as the virtue of a leader.

 Prudence is a virtue of government.

 So is boldness.

 One must govern with boldness and prudence.

 I spoke about baptism and communion as spiritual food that helps one to go on; it is to be considered a remedy not a prize.

 Some immediately thought about the sacraments for remarried divorcees, but I did not refer to any specific cases; I simply wanted to point out a principle.

 We must try to facilitate people’s faith, rather than control it.

 Last year in Argentina I condemned the attitude of some priests who did not baptize the children of unmarried mothers.

 This is a sick mentality.



And what about remarried divorcees?


The exclusion of divorced people who contract a second marriage from communion is not a sanction.

 It is important to remember this.

 But I didn’t talk about this in the Exhortation.

 We will discuss marriage as a whole at the Consistory meetings in February.

 The issues will also be addressed at the Extraordinary Synod in October 2014 and again at the Ordinary Synod the following year.

 Many elements will be examined in more detail and clarified during these sessions.



What is the right relationship between the Church and politics?


The relationship needs to be parallel and convergent at the same time.

 Parallel because each of us has his or her own path to take, and his or her different tasks.

 Convergent only in helping others.

 When relationships converge first, without the people, or without taking the people into account, that is when the bond with political power is formed, leading the Church to rot: business, compromises… The relationship needs to proceed in a parallel way, each with its own method, tasks and vocation, converging only in the common good.

 Politics is noble; it is one of the highest forms of charity, as Paul VI used to say.

 We sully it when we mix it with business.

 The relationship between the Church and political power can also be corrupted if common good is not the only converging point.



May I ask you if the Church will have women cardinals in the future?


I don’t know where this idea sprang from.

 Women in the Church must be valued not “clericalised”.

 Whoever thinks of women as cardinals suffers a bit from clericalism.



Could you have imagined a year ago that you would be celebrating Christmas 2013 in St.

 Peter’s?


Absolutely not.



Were you expecting to be elected?


No I didn’t expect it.

 I never lost my peace as the number of votes increased.

 I remained calm.

 And that peace is still there, I consider it a gift from the Lord.

 When the final balloting was over, I was taken to the center of the Sistine Chapel and asked if I accepted.

 I said I did and that I had chosen the name Francis.

 Only then did I walk away.

 I was taken to the next room to change (my cassock).

 Then, just before I made my public appearance, I knelt down to pray for some minutes in the Pauline chapel along with Cardinals (Agostino) Vallini and (Claudio) Hummes.


The great danger in today’s world, pervaded as it is by consumerism, is the desolation and anguish born of a complacent yet covetous heart, the feverish pursuit of frivolous pleasures, and a blunted conscience.

 Whenever our interior life becomes caught up in its own interests and concerns, there is no longer room for others, no place for the poor.

 God’s voice is no longer heard, the quiet joy of his love is no longer felt, and the desire to do good fades.

 This is a very real danger for believers too.

 Many fall prey to it, and end up resentful, angry and listless.

 That is no way to live a dignified and fulfilled life; it is not God’s will for us, nor is it the life in the Spirit which has its source in the heart of the risen Christ.



Just as the commandment “Thou shalt not kill” sets a clear limit in order to safeguard the value of human life, today we also have to say “thou shalt not” to an economy of exclusion and inequality.

 Such an economy kills.

 How can it be that it is not a news item when an elderly homeless person dies of exposure, but it is news when the stock market loses two points?

 This is a case of exclusion.

 Can we continue to stand by when food is thrown away while people are starving?

 This is a case of inequality.

 Today everything comes under the laws of competition and the survival of the fittest, where the powerful feed upon the powerless.

 As a consequence, masses of people find themselves excluded and marginalized: without work, without possibilities, without any means of escape.



Human beings are themselves considered consumer goods to be used and then discarded.

 We have created a “disposable” culture which is now spreading.

 It is no longer simply about exploitation and oppression, but something new.

 Exclusion ultimately has to do with what it means to be a part of the society in which we live; those excluded are no longer society’s underside or its fringes or its disenfranchised – they are no longer even a part of it.

 The excluded are not the “exploited” but the outcast, the “leftovers”.



54.

 In this context, some people continue to defend trickle-down theories which assume that economic growth, encouraged by a free market, will inevitably succeed in bringing about greater justice and inclusiveness in the world.

 This opinion, which has never been confirmed by the facts, expresses a crude and naïve trust in the goodness of those wielding economic power and in the sacralized workings of the prevailing economic system.

 Meanwhile, the excluded are still waiting.

 To sustain a lifestyle which excludes others, or to sustain enthusiasm for that selfish ideal, a globalization of indifference has developed.

 Almost without being aware of it, we end up being incapable of feeling compassion at the outcry of the poor, weeping for other people’s pain, and feeling a need to help them, as though all this were someone else’s responsibility and not our own.

 The culture of prosperity deadens us; we are thrilled if the market offers us something new to purchase; and in the meantime all those lives stunted for lack of opportunity seem a mere spectacle; they fail to move us.



No to the new idolatry of money

55.

 One cause of this situation is found in our relationship with money, since we calmly accept its dominion over ourselves and our societies.

 The current financial crisis can make us overlook the fact that it originated in a profound human crisis: the denial of the primacy of the human person!
 We have created new idols.

 The worship of the ancient golden calf (cf.

 Ex 32:1-35) has returned in a new and ruthless guise in the idolatry of money and the dictatorship of an impersonal economy lacking a truly human purpose.

 The worldwide crisis affecting finance and the economy lays bare their imbalances and, above all, their lack of real concern for human beings; man is reduced to one of his needs alone: consumption.



56.

 While the earnings of a minority are growing exponentially, so too is the gap separating the majority from the prosperity enjoyed by those happy few.

 This imbalance is the result of ideologies which defend the absolute autonomy of the marketplace and financial speculation.

 Consequently, they reject the right of states, charged with vigilance for the common good, to exercise any form of control.

 A new tyranny is thus born, invisible and often virtual, which unilaterally and relentlessly imposes its own laws and rules.

 Debt and the accumulation of interest also make it difficult for countries to realize the potential of their own economies and keep citizens from enjoying their real purchasing power.

 To all this we can add widespread corruption and self-serving tax evasion, which have taken on worldwide dimensions.

 The thirst for power and possessions knows no limits.

 In this system, which tends to devour everything which stands in the way of increased profits, whatever is fragile, like the environment, is defenseless before the interests of a deified market, which become the only rule.



No to a financial system which rules rather than serves

57.

 Behind this attitude lurks a rejection of ethics and a rejection of God.

 Ethics has come to be viewed with a certain scornful derision.

 It is seen as counterproductive, too human, because it makes money and power relative.

 It is felt to be a threat, since it condemns the manipulation and debasement of the person.

 In effect, ethics leads to a God who calls for a committed response which is outside of the categories of the marketplace.

 When these latter are absolutized, God can only be seen as uncontrollable, unmanageable, even dangerous, since he calls human beings to their full realization and to freedom from all forms of enslavement.

 Ethics – a non-ideological ethics – would make it possible to bring about balance and a more humane social order.

 With this in mind, I encourage financial experts and political leaders to ponder the words of one of the sages of antiquity: “Not to share one’s wealth with the poor is to steal from them and to take away their livelihood.

 It is not our own goods which we hold, but theirs”.

[55]

58.

 A financial reform open to such ethical considerations would require a vigorous change of approach on the part of political leaders.

 I urge them to face this challenge with determination and an eye to the future, while not ignoring, of course, the specifics of each case.

 Money must serve, not rule!
 The Pope loves everyone, rich and poor alike, but he is obliged in the name of Christ to remind all that the rich must help, respect and promote the poor.

 I exhort you to generous solidarity and a return of economics and finance to an ethical approach which favours human beings.



No to the inequality which spawns violence

59.

 Today in many places we hear a call for greater security.

 But until exclusion and inequality in society and between peoples is reversed, it will be impossible to eliminate violence.

 The poor and the poorer peoples are accused of violence, yet without equal opportunities the different forms of aggression and conflict will find a fertile terrain for growth and eventually explode.

 When a society – whether local, national or global – is willing to leave a part of itself on the fringes, no political programmes or resources spent on law enforcement or surveillance systems can indefinitely guarantee tranquility.

 This is not the case simply because inequality provokes a violent reaction from those excluded from the system, but because the socioeconomic system is unjust at its root.

 Just as goodness tends to spread, the toleration of evil, which is injustice, tends to expand its baneful influence and quietly to undermine any political and social system, no matter how solid it may appear.

 If every action has its consequences, an evil embedded in the structures of a society has a constant potential for disintegration and death.

 It is evil crystallized in unjust social structures, which cannot be the basis of hope for a better future.

 We are far from the so-called “end of history”, since the conditions for a sustainable and peaceful development have not yet been adequately articulated and realized.



60.

 Today’s economic mechanisms promote inordinate consumption, yet it is evident that unbridled consumerism combined with inequality proves doubly damaging to the social fabric.

 Inequality eventually engenders a violence which recourse to arms cannot and never will be able to resolve.

 This serves only to offer false hopes to those clamouring for heightened security, even though nowadays we know that weapons and violence, rather than providing solutions, create new and more serious conflicts.

 Some simply content themselves with blaming the poor and the poorer countries themselves for their troubles; indulging in unwarranted generalizations, they claim that the solution is an “education” that would tranquilize them, making them tame and harmless.

 All this becomes even more exasperating for the marginalized in the light of the widespread and deeply rooted corruption found in many countries – in their governments, businesses and institutions – whatever the political ideology of their leaders.


“And God saw that it was good” (Gen 1:12, 18, 21, 25).

 The biblical account of the beginning of the history of the world and of humanity speaks to us of a God who looks at creation, in a sense contemplating it, and declares: “It is good”.

 This allows us to enter into God’s heart and, precisely from within him, to receive his message.

 We can ask ourselves: what does this message mean?

 What does it say to me, to you, to all of us?


It says to us simply that this, our world, in the heart and mind of God, is the “house of harmony and peace”, and that it is the space in which everyone is able to find their proper place and feel “at home”, because it is “good”.

 All of creation forms a harmonious and good unity, but above all humanity, made in the image and likeness of God, is one family, in which relationships are marked by a true fraternity not only in words: the other person is a brother or sister to love, and our relationship with God, who is love, fidelity and goodness, mirrors every human relationship and brings harmony to the whole of creation.

 God’s world is a world where everyone feels responsible for the other, for the good of the other.

 This evening, in reflection, fasting and prayer, each of us deep down should ask ourselves: Is this really the world that I desire?

 Is this really the world that we all carry in our hearts?

 Is the world that we want really a world of harmony and peace, in ourselves, in our relations with others, in families, in cities, in and between nations?

 And does not true freedom mean choosing ways in this world that lead to the good of all and are guided by love?


But then we wonder: Is this the world in which we are living?

 Creation retains its beauty which fills us with awe and it remains a good work.

 But there is also “violence, division, disagreement, war”.

 This occurs when man, the summit of creation, stops contemplating beauty and goodness, and withdraws into his own selfishness.


When man thinks only of himself, of his own interests and places himself in the centre, when he permits himself to be captivated by the idols of dominion and power, when he puts himself in God’s place, then all relationships are broken and everything is ruined; then the door opens to violence, indifference, and conflict.

 This is precisely what the passage in the Book of Genesis seeks to teach us in the story of the Fall: man enters into conflict with himself, he realizes that he is naked and he hides himself because he is afraid (cf.

 Gen 3: 10), he is afraid of God’s glance; he accuses the woman, she who is flesh of his flesh (cf.

 v.

 12); he breaks harmony with creation, he begins to raise his hand against his brother to kill him.

 Can we say that from harmony he passes to “disharmony”?

 No, there is no such thing as “disharmony”; there is either harmony or we fall into chaos, where there is violence, argument, conflict, fear ….


It is exactly in this chaos that God asks man’s conscience: “Where is Abel your brother?

” and Cain responds: “I do not know; am I my brother’s keeper?

” (Gen 4:9).

 We too are asked this question, it would be good for us to ask ourselves as well: Am I really my brother’s keeper?

 Yes, you are your brother’s keeper!
 To be human means to care for one another!
 But when harmony is broken, a metamorphosis occurs: the brother who is to be cared for and loved becomes an adversary to fight, to kill.

 What violence occurs at that moment, how many conflicts, how many wars have marked our history!
 We need only look at the suffering of so many brothers and sisters.

 This is not a question of coincidence, but the truth: we bring about the rebirth of Cain in every act of violence and in every war.

 All of us!
 And even today we continue this history of conflict between brothers, even today we raise our hands against our brother.

 Even today, we let ourselves be guided by idols, by selfishness, by our own interests, and this attitude persists.

 We have perfected our weapons, our conscience has fallen asleep, and we have sharpened our ideas to justify ourselves.

 As if it were normal, we continue to sow destruction, pain, death!
 Violence and war lead only to death, they speak of death!
 Violence and war are the language of death!

At this point I ask myself: Is it possible to change direction?

 Can we get out of this spiral of sorrow and death?

 Can we learn once again to walk and live in the ways of peace?

 Invoking the help of God, under the maternal gaze of the Salus Populi Romani, Queen of Peace, I say: Yes, it is possible for everyone!
 From every corner of the world tonight, I would like to hear us cry out: Yes, it is possible for everyone!
 Or even better, I would like for each one of us, from the least to the greatest, including those called to govern nations, to respond: Yes, we want it!
 My Christian faith urges me to look to the Cross.

 How I wish that all men and women of good will would look to the Cross if only for a moment!
 There, we can see God’s reply: violence is not answered with violence, death is not answered with the language of death.

 In the silence of the Cross, the uproar of weapons ceases and the language of reconciliation, forgiveness, dialogue, and peace is spoken.


This evening, I ask the Lord that we Christians, and our brothers and sisters of other religions, and every man and woman of good will, cry out forcefully: violence and war are never the way to peace!
 Let everyone be moved to look into the depths of his or her conscience and listen to that word which says: Leave behind the self-interest that hardens your heart, overcome the indifference that makes your heart insensitive towards others, conquer your deadly reasoning, and open yourself to dialogue and reconciliation.

 Look upon your brother’s sorrow and do not add to it, stay your hand, rebuild the harmony that has been shattered; and all this achieved not by conflict but by encounter!

May the noise of weapons cease!
 War always marks the failure of peace, it is always a defeat for humanity.

 Let the words of Pope Paul VI resound again: “No more one against the other, no more, never!
 … war never again, never again war!
” (Address to the United Nations, 1965).

 ”Peace expresses itself only in peace, a peace which is not separate from the demands of justice but which is fostered by personal sacrifice, clemency, mercy and love” (World Day of Peace Message, 1975).

 Forgiveness, dialogue, reconciliation – these are the words of peace, in beloved Syria, in the Middle East, in all the world!
 Let us pray for reconciliation and peace, let us work for reconciliation and peace, and let us all become, in every place, men and women of reconciliation and peace!
 Amen.



Father Spadaro: Who is Jorge Mario Bergoglio?



Pope Francis: I do not know what might be the most fitting description.

.

.

.

 I am a sinner.

 This is the most accurate definition.

 It is not a figure of speech, a literary genre.

 I am a sinner.



Yes, perhaps I can say that I am a bit astute, that I can adapt to circumstances, but it is also true that I am a bit naïve.

 Yes, but the best summary, the one that comes more from the inside and I feel most true is this: I am a sinner whom the Lord has looked upon.

 I am one who is looked upon by the Lord.

 I always felt my motto, Miserando atque Eligendo, was very true for me.



I think the Latin gerund miserando is impossible to translate in both Italian and Spanish.

 I like to translate it with another gerund that does not exist: misericordiando.



I do not know Rome well.

 I know a few things.

 These include the Basilica of St.

 Mary Major; I always used to go there.

 I know St.

 Mary Major, St.

 Peter’s.

.

.

but when I had to come to Rome, I always stayed in Via della Scrofa.

 From there I often visited the Church of St.

 Louis of France, and I went there to contemplate the painting of ‘The Calling of St.

 Matthew,’ by Caravaggio.



That finger of Jesus, pointing at Matthew.

 That’s me.

 I feel like him.

 Like Matthew.



It is the gesture of Matthew that strikes me: he holds on to his money as if to say, ‘No, not me!
 No, this money is mine.

’ Here, this is me, a sinner on whom the Lord has turned his gaze.

 And this is what I said when they asked me if I would accept my election as pontiff.



I am a sinner, but I trust in the infinite mercy and patience of our Lord Jesus Christ, and I accept in a spirit of penance.



Father Spadaro: Why Did You Become a Jesuit?

 Holy Father, what made you choose to enter the Society of Jesus?

 What struck you about the Jesuit order?



Pope Francis: I wanted something more.

 But I did not know what.

 I entered the diocesan seminary.

 I liked the Dominicans and I had Dominican friends.

 But then I chose the Society of Jesus, which I knew well because the seminary was entrusted to the Jesuits.

 Three things in particular struck me about the Society: the missionary spirit, community and discipline.

 And this is strange, because I am a really, really undisciplined person.

 But their discipline, the way they manage their time—these things struck me so much.



And then a thing that is really important for me: community.

 I was always looking for a community.

 I did not see myself as a priest on my own.

 I need a community.

 And you can tell this by the fact that I am here in Santa Marta.

 At the time of the conclave I lived in Room 207.

 (The rooms were assigned by drawing lots.

) This room where we are now was a guest room.

 I chose to live here, in Room 201, because when I took possession of the papal apartment, inside myself I distinctly heard a ‘no.

’ The papal apartment in the Apostolic Palace is not luxurious.

 It is old, tastefully decorated and large, but not luxurious.

 But in the end it is like an inverted funnel.

 It is big and spacious, but the entrance is really tight.

 People can come only in dribs and drabs, and I cannot live without people.

 I need to live my life with others.



Father Spadaro: What Does It Mean for a Jesuit to Be Bishop of Rome?

 How do you understand the role of service to the universal church that you have been called to play in the light of Ignatian spirituality?

 What does it mean for a Jesuit to be elected pope?

 What element of Ignatian spirituality helps you live your ministry?



Pope Francis: Discernment.

 Discernment is one of the things that worked inside St.

 Ignatius.

 For him it is an instrument of struggle in order to know the Lord and follow him more closely.

 I was always struck by a saying that describes the vision of Ignatius: non coerceri a maximo, sed contineri a minimo divinum est (“not to be limited by the greatest and yet to be contained in the tiniest—this is the divine”).

 I thought a lot about this phrase in connection with the issue of different roles in the government of the church, about becoming the superior of somebody else: it is important not to be restricted by a larger space, and it is important to be able to stay in restricted spaces.

 This virtue of the large and small is magnanimity.

 Thanks to magnanimity, we can always look at the horizon from the position where we are.

 That means being able to do the little things of every day with a big heart open to God and to others.

 That means being able to appreciate the small things inside large horizons, those of the kingdom of God.



This motto offers parameters to assume a correct position for discernment, in order to hear the things of God from God’s ‘point of view.

’ According to St.

 Ignatius, great principles must be embodied in the circumstances of place, time and people.

 In his own way, John XXIII adopted this attitude with regard to the government of the church, when he repeated the motto, ‘See everything; turn a blind eye to much; correct a little.

’ John XXIII saw all things, the maximum dimension, but he chose to correct a few, the minimum dimension.

 You can have large projects and implement them by means of a few of the smallest things.

 Or you can use weak means that are more effective than strong ones, as Paul also said in his First Letter to the Corinthians.



This discernment takes time.

 For example, many think that changes and reforms can take place in a short time.

 I believe that we always need time to lay the foundations for real, effective change.

 And this is the time of discernment.

 Sometimes discernment instead urges us to do precisely what you had at first thought you would do later.

 And that is what has happened to me in recent months.

 Discernment is always done in the presence of the Lord, looking at the signs, listening to the things that happen, the feeling of the people, especially the poor.

 My choices, including those related to the day-to-day aspects of life, like the use of a modest car, are related to a spiritual discernment that responds to a need that arises from looking at things, at people and from reading the signs of the times.

 Discernment in the Lord guides me in my way of governing.



But I am always wary of decisions made hastily.

 I am always wary of the first decision, that is, the first thing that comes to my mind if I have to make a decision.

 This is usually the wrong thing.

 I have to wait and assess, looking deep into myself, taking the necessary time.

 The wisdom of discernment redeems the necessary ambiguity of life and helps us find the most appropriate means, which do not always coincide with what looks great and strong.



How can the Society of Jesus be of service to the church today, what are its characteristics, but also the possible challenges facing the Society of Jesus?


The Society of Jesus is an institution in tension, always fundamentally in tension.

 A Jesuit is a person who is not centered in himself.

 The Society itself also looks to a center outside itself; its center is Christ and his church.

 So if the Society centers itself in Christ and the church, it has two fundamental points of reference for its balance and for being able to live on the margins, on the frontier.

 If it looks too much in upon itself, it puts itself at the center as a very solid, very well ‘armed’ structure, but then it runs the risk of feeling safe and self-sufficient.

 The Society must always have before itself the Deus semper maior, the always-greater God, and the pursuit of the ever greater glory of God, the church as true bride of Christ our Lord, Christ the king who conquers us and to whom we offer our whole person and all our hard work, even if we are clay pots, inadequate.

 This tension takes us out of ourselves continuously.

 The tool that makes the Society of Jesus not centered in itself, really strong, is, then, the account of conscience, which is at the same time paternal and fraternal, because it helps the Society to fulfill its mission better.



But it is difficult to speak of the Society.

 When you express too much, you run the risk of being misunderstood.

 The Society of Jesus can be described only in narrative form.

 Only in narrative form do you discern, not in a philosophical or theological explanation, which allows you rather to discuss.

 The style of the Society is not shaped by discussion, but by discernment, which of course presupposes discussion as part of the process.

 The mystical dimension of discernment never defines its edges and does not complete the thought.

 The Jesuit must be a person whose thought is incomplete, in the sense of open-ended thinking.

 There have been periods in the Society in which Jesuits have lived in an environment of closed and rigid thought, more instructive-ascetic than mystical: this distortion of Jesuit life gave birth to the Epitome Instituti.



No, the Jesuit always thinks, again and again, looking at the horizon toward which he must go, with Christ at the center.

 This is his real strength.

 And that pushes the Society to be searching, creative and generous.

 So now, more than ever, the Society of Jesus must be contemplative in action, must live a profound closeness to the whole church as both the ‘people of God’ and ‘holy mother the hierarchical church.

’ This requires much humility, sacrifice and courage, especially when you are misunderstood or you are the subject of misunderstandings and slanders, but that is the most fruitful attitude.

 Let us think of the tensions of the past history, in the previous centuries, about the Chinese rites controversy, the Malabar rites and the Reductions in Paraguay.



I am a witness myself to the misunderstandings and problems that the Society has recently experienced.

 Among those there were tough times, especially when it came to the issue of extending to all Jesuits the fourth vow of obedience to the pope.

 What gave me confidence at the time of Father Arrupe [superior general of the Jesuits from 1965 to 1983] was the fact that he was a man of prayer, a man who spent much time in prayer.

 I remember him when he prayed sitting on the ground in the Japanese style.

 For this he had the right attitude and made the right decisions.



Father Spadaro: Do you think that your past government experience can serve you in governing the universal church?



Pope Francis: In my experience as superior in the Society, to be honest, I have not always behaved in that way—that is, I did not always do the necessary consultation.

 And this was not a good thing.

 My style of government as a Jesuit at the beginning had many faults.

 That was a difficult time for the Society: an entire generation of Jesuits had disappeared.

 Because of this I found myself provincial when I was still very young.

 I was only 36 years old.

 That was crazy.

 I had to deal with difficult situations, and I made my decisions abruptly and by myself.

 Yes, but I must add one thing: when I entrust something to someone, I totally trust that person.

 He or she must make a really big mistake before I rebuke that person.

 But despite this, eventually people get tired of authoritarianism.



My authoritarian and quick manner of making decisions led me to have serious problems and to be accused of being ultraconservative.

 I lived a time of great interior crisis when I was in Cordova.

 To be sure, I have never been like Blessed Imelda [a goody-goody], but I have never been a right-winger.

 It was my authoritarian way of making decisions that created problems.



I say these things from life experience and because I want to make clear what the dangers are.

 Over time I learned many things.

 The Lord has allowed this growth in knowledge of government through my faults and my sins.

 So as Archbishop of Buenos Aires, I had a meeting with the six auxiliary bishops every two weeks, and several times a year with the council of priests.

 They asked questions and we opened the floor for discussion.

 This greatly helped me to make the best decisions.

 But now I hear some people tell me: ‘Do not consult too much, and decide by yourself.

’ Instead, I believe that consultation is very important.



The consistories, the synods are, for example, important places to make real and active this consultation.

 We must, however, give them a less rigid form.

 I do not want token consultations, but real consultations.

 The consultation group of eight cardinals, this ‘outsider’ advisory group, is not only my decision, but it is the result of the will of the cardinals, as it was expressed in the general congregations before the conclave.

 And I want to see that this is a real, not ceremonial consultation.



Father Spadaro: What does it mean exactly for you to “think with the church?

”

Pope Francis: The image of the church I like is that of the holy, faithful people of God.

 This is the definition I often use, and then there is that image from the Second Vatican Council’s ‘Dogmatic Constitution on the Church’ (No.

 12).

 Belonging to a people has a strong theological value.

 In the history of salvation, God has saved a people.

 There is no full identity without belonging to a people.

 No one is saved alone, as an isolated individual, but God attracts us looking at the complex web of relationships that take place in the human community.

 God enters into this dynamic, this participation in the web of human relationships.



The people itself constitutes a subject.

 And the church is the people of God on the journey through history, with joys and sorrows.

 Thinking with the church, therefore, is my way of being a part of this people.

 And all the faithful, considered as a whole, are infallible in matters of belief, and the people display this infallibilitas in credendo, this infallibility in believing, through a supernatural sense of the faith of all the people walking together.

 This is what I understand today as the ‘thinking with the church’ of which St.

 Ignatius speaks.

 When the dialogue among the people and the bishops and the pope goes down this road and is genuine, then it is assisted by the Holy Spirit.

 So this thinking with the church does not concern theologians only.



This is how it is with Mary: If you want to know who she is, you ask theologians; if you want to know how to love her, you have to ask the people.

 In turn, Mary loved Jesus with the heart of the people, as we read in the Magnificat.

 We should not even think, therefore, that ‘thinking with the church’ means only thinking with the hierarchy of the church.



And, of course, we must be very careful not to think that this infallibilitas of all the faithful I am talking about in the light of Vatican II is a form of populism.

 No; it is the experience of ‘holy mother the hierarchical church,’ as St.

 Ignatius called it, the church as the people of God, pastors and people together.

 The church is the totality of God’s people.



I see the sanctity of God’s people, this daily sanctity.

 There is a ‘holy middle class,’ which we can all be part of, the holiness Malègue wrote about.



I see the holiness in the patience of the people of God: a woman who is raising children, a man who works to bring home the bread, the sick, the elderly priests who have so many wounds but have a smile on their faces because they served the Lord, the sisters who work hard and live a hidden sanctity.

 This is for me the common sanctity.

 I often associate sanctity with patience: not only patience as hypomoné, taking charge of the events and circumstances of life, but also as a constancy in going forward, day by day.

 This is the sanctity of the militant church also mentioned by St.

 Ignatius.

 This was the sanctity of my parents: my dad, my mom, my grandmother Rosa who loved me so much.

 In my breviary I have the last will of my grandmother Rosa, and I read it often.

 For me it is like a prayer.

 She is a saint who has suffered so much, also spiritually, and yet always went forward with courage.



This church with which we should be thinking is the home of all, not a small chapel that can hold only a small group of selected people.

 We must not reduce the bosom of the universal church to a nest protecting our mediocrity.

 And the church is Mother; the church is fruitful.

 It must be.

 You see, when I perceive negative behavior in ministers of the church or in consecrated men or women, the first thing that comes to mind is: ‘Here’s an unfruitful bachelor’ or ‘Here’s a spinster.

’ They are neither fathers nor mothers, in the sense that they have not been able to give spiritual life.

 Instead, for example, when I read the life of the Salesian missionaries who went to Patagonia, I read a story of the fullness of life, of fruitfulness.



Another example from recent days that I saw got the attention of newspapers: the phone call I made to a young man who wrote me a letter.

 I called him because that letter was so beautiful, so simple.

 For me this was an act of generativity.

 I realized that he was a young man who is growing, that he saw in me a father, and that the letter tells something of his life to that father.

 The father cannot say, ‘I do not care.

’ This type of fruitfulness is so good for me.



Father Spadaro: What are your hopes for the universal church that come from these churches?



Pope Francis: The young Catholic churches, as they grow, develop a synthesis of faith, culture and life, and so it is a synthesis different from the one developed by the ancient churches.

 For me, the relationship between the ancient Catholic churches and the young ones is similar to the relationship between young and elderly people in a society.

 They build the future, the young ones with their strength and the others with their wisdom.

 You always run some risks, of course.

 The younger churches are likely to feel self-sufficient; the ancient ones are likely to want to impose on the younger churches their cultural models.

 But we build the future together.



Father Spadaro: What does the church need most at this historic moment?

 Do we need reforms?

 What are your wishes for the church in the coming years?

 What kind of church do you dream of?



Pope Francis: Pope Benedict has done an act of holiness, greatness, humility.

 He is a man of God.



I see clearly that the thing the church needs most today is the ability to heal wounds and to warm the hearts of the faithful; it needs nearness, proximity.

 I see the church as a field hospital after battle.

 It is useless to ask a seriously injured person if he has high cholesterol and about the level of his blood sugars!
 You have to heal his wounds.

 Then we can talk about everything else.

 Heal the wounds, heal the wounds.

.

.

.

 And you have to start from the ground up.



The church sometimes has locked itself up in small things, in small-minded rules.

 The most important thing is the first proclamation: Jesus Christ has saved you.

 And the ministers of the church must be ministers of mercy above all.

 The confessor, for example, is always in danger of being either too much of a rigorist or too lax.

 Neither is merciful, because neither of them really takes responsibility for the person.

 The rigorist washes his hands so that he leaves it to the commandment.

 The loose minister washes his hands by simply saying, ‘This is not a sin’ or something like that.

 In pastoral ministry we must accompany people, and we must heal their wounds.



How are we treating the people of God?

 I dream of a church that is a mother and shepherdess.

 The church’s ministers must be merciful, take responsibility for the people and accompany them like the good Samaritan, who washes, cleans and raises up his neighbor.

 This is pure Gospel.

 God is greater than sin.

 The structural and organizational reforms are secondary—that is, they come afterward.

 The first reform must be the attitude.

 The ministers of the Gospel must be people who can warm the hearts of the people, who walk through the dark night with them, who know how to dialogue and to descend themselves into their people’s night, into the darkness, but without getting lost.

 The people of God want pastors, not clergy acting like bureaucrats or government officials.

 The bishops, particularly, must be able to support the movements of God among their people with patience, so that no one is left behind.

 But they must also be able to accompany the flock that has a flair for finding new paths.



Instead of being just a church that welcomes and receives by keeping the doors open, let us try also to be a church that finds new roads, that is able to step outside itself and go to those who do not attend Mass, to those who have quit or are indifferent.

 The ones who quit sometimes do it for reasons that, if properly understood and assessed, can lead to a return.

 But that takes audacity and courage.



Father Spadaro: I mention to Pope Francis that there are Christians who live in situations that are irregular for the church or in complex situations that represent open wounds.

 I mention the divorced and remarried, same-sex couples and other difficult situations.

 What kind of pastoral work can we do in these cases?

 What kinds of tools can we use?



Pope Francis: We need to proclaim the Gospel on every street corner, preaching the good news of the kingdom and healing, even with our preaching, every kind of disease and wound.

 In Buenos Aires I used to receive letters from homosexual persons who are ‘socially wounded’ because they tell me that they feel like the church has always condemned them.

 But the church does not want to do this.

 During the return flight from Rio de Janeiro I said that if a homosexual person is of good will and is in search of God, I am no one to judge.

 By saying this, I said what the catechism says.

 Religion has the right to express its opinion in the service of the people, but God in creation has set us free: it is not possible to interfere spiritually in the life of a person.



A person once asked me, in a provocative manner, if I approved of homosexuality.

 I replied with another question: ‘Tell me: when God looks at a gay person, does he endorse the existence of this person with love, or reject and condemn this person?

’ We must always consider the person.

 Here we enter into the mystery of the human being.

 In life, God accompanies persons, and we must accompany them, starting from their situation.

 It is necessary to accompany them with mercy.

 When that happens, the Holy Spirit inspires the priest to say the right thing.



This is also the great benefit of confession as a sacrament: evaluating case by case and discerning what is the best thing to do for a person who seeks God and grace.

 The confessional is not a torture chamber, but the place in which the Lord’s mercy motivates us to do better.

 I also consider the situation of a woman with a failed marriage in her past and who also had an abortion.

 Then this woman remarries, and she is now happy and has five children.

 That abortion in her past weighs heavily on her conscience and she sincerely regrets it.

 She would like to move forward in her Christian life.

 What is the confessor to do?



We cannot insist only on issues related to abortion, gay marriage and the use of contraceptive methods.

 This is not possible.

 I have not spoken much about these things, and I was reprimanded for that.

 But when we speak about these issues, we have to talk about them in a context.

 The teaching of the church, for that matter, is clear and I am a son of the church, but it is not necessary to talk about these issues all the time.



The dogmatic and moral teachings of the church are not all equivalent.

 The church’s pastoral ministry cannot be obsessed with the transmission of a disjointed multitude of doctrines to be imposed insistently.

 Proclamation in a missionary style focuses on the essentials, on the necessary things: this is also what fascinates and attracts more, what makes the heart burn, as it did for the disciples at Emmaus.

 We have to find a new balance; otherwise even the moral edifice of the church is likely to fall like a house of cards, losing the freshness and fragrance of the Gospel.

 The proposal of the Gospel must be more simple, profound, radiant.

 It is from this proposition that the moral consequences then flow.



I say this also thinking about the preaching and content of our preaching.

 A beautiful homily, a genuine sermon must begin with the first proclamation, with the proclamation of salvation.

 There is nothing more solid, deep and sure than this proclamation.

 Then you have to do catechesis.

 Then you can draw even a moral consequence.

 But the proclamation of the saving love of God comes before moral and religious imperatives.

 Today sometimes it seems that the opposite order is prevailing.

 The homily is the touchstone to measure the pastor’s proximity and ability to meet his people, because those who preach must recognize the heart of their community and must be able to see where the desire for God is lively and ardent.

 The message of the Gospel, therefore, is not to be reduced to some aspects that, although relevant, on their own do not show the heart of the message of Jesus Christ.



Father Spadaro: What is the specific place of religious men and women in the church of today?



Pope Francis: Religious men and women are prophets.

 They are those who have chosen a following of Jesus that imitates his life in obedience to the Father, poverty, community life and chastity.

 In this sense, the vows cannot end up being caricatures; otherwise, for example, community life becomes hell, and chastity becomes a way of life for unfruitful bachelors.

 The vow of chastity must be a vow of fruitfulness.

 In the church, the religious are called to be prophets in particular by demonstrating how Jesus lived on this earth, and to proclaim how the kingdom of God will be in its perfection.

 A religious must never give up prophecy.

 This does not mean opposing the hierarchical part of the church, although the prophetic function and the hierarchical structure do not coincide.

 I am talking about a proposal that is always positive, but it should not cause timidity.

 Let us think about what so many great saints, monks and religious men and women have done, from St.

 Anthony the Abbot onward.

 Being prophets may sometimes imply making waves.

 I do not know how to put it.

.

.

.

 Prophecy makes noise, uproar, some say ‘a mess.

’ But in reality, the charism of religious people is like yeast: prophecy announces the spirit of the Gospel.



Father Spadaro: What do you think of the dicasteries of the Roman Curia, the various departments that assist you in your mission?



Pope Francis: The dicasteries of the Roman Curia are at the service of the pope and the bishops.

 They must help both the particular churches and the bishops’ conferences.

 They are instruments of help.

 In some cases, however, when they are not functioning well, they run the risk of becoming institutions of censorship.

 It is amazing to see the denunciations for lack of orthodoxy that come to Rome.

 I think the cases should be investigated by the local bishops’ conferences, which can get valuable assistance from Rome.

 These cases, in fact, are much better dealt with locally.

 The Roman congregations are mediators; they are not middlemen or managers.



Father Spadaro: How can we reconcile in harmony Petrine primacy and collegiality?

 Which roads are feasible also from an ecumenical perspective?



Pope Francis: We must walk together: the people, the bishops and the pope.

 Synodality should be lived at various levels.

 Maybe it is time to change the methods of the Synod of Bishops, because it seems to me that the current method is not dynamic.

 This will also have ecumenical value, especially with our Orthodox brethren.

 From them we can learn more about the meaning of episcopal collegiality and the tradition of synodality.

 The joint effort of reflection, looking at how the church was governed in the early centuries, before the breakup between East and West, will bear fruit in due time.

 In ecumenical relations it is important not only to know each other better, but also to recognize what the Spirit has sown in the other as a gift for us.

 I want to continue the discussion that was begun in 2007 by the joint commission on how to exercise the Petrine primacy, which led to the signing of the Ravenna Document.

 We must continue on this path.



Father Spadaro: How do you envision the future unity of the church in light of this response?



Pope Francis: We must walk united with our differences: there is no other way to become one.

 This is the way of Jesus.



Father Spadaro: What should be the role of women in the church?

 How do we make their role more visible today?



Pope Francis: I am wary of a solution that can be reduced to a kind of ‘female machismo,’ because a woman has a different make-up than a man.

 But what I hear about the role of women is often inspired by an ideology of machismo.

 Women are asking deep questions that must be addressed.

 The church cannot be herself without the woman and her role.

 The woman is essential for the church.

 Mary, a woman, is more important than the bishops.

 I say this because we must not confuse the function with the dignity.

 We must therefore investigate further the role of women in the church.

 We have to work harder to develop a profound theology of the woman.

 Only by making this step will it be possible to better reflect on their function within the church.

 The feminine genius is needed wherever we make important decisions.

 The challenge today is this: to think about the specific place of women also in those places where the authority of the church is exercised for various areas of the church.



Father Spadaro: What did the Second Vatican Council accomplish?



Pope Francis: Vatican II was a re-reading of the Gospel in light of contemporary culture.

 Vatican II produced a renewal movement that simply comes from the same Gospel.

 Its fruits are enormous.

 Just recall the liturgy.

 The work of liturgical reform has been a service to the people as a re-reading of the Gospel from a concrete historical situation.

 Yes, there are hermeneutics of continuity and discontinuity, but one thing is clear: the dynamic of reading the Gospel, actualizing its message for today—which was typical of Vatican II—is absolutely irreversible.

 Then there are particular issues, like the liturgy according to the Vetus Ordo.

 I think the decision of Pope Benedict [his decision of July 7, 2007, to allow a wider use of the Tridentine Mass] was prudent and motivated by the desire to help people who have this sensitivity.

 What is worrying, though, is the risk of the ideologization of the Vetus Ordo, its exploitation.



Father Spadaro: How do you seek and find God in all things?



Pope Francis: What I said in Rio referred to the time in which we seek God.

 In fact, there is a temptation to seek God in the past or in a possible future.

 God is certainly in the past because we can see the footprints.

 And God is also in the future as a promise.

 But the ‘concrete’ God, so to speak, is today.

 For this reason, complaining never helps us find God.

 The complaints of today about how ‘barbaric’ the world is—these complaints sometimes end up giving birth within the church to desires to establish order in the sense of pure conservation, as a defense.

 No: God is to be encountered in the world of today.



God manifests himself in historical revelation, in history.

 Time initiates processes, and space crystallizes them.

 God is in history, in the processes.



We must not focus on occupying the spaces where power is exercised, but rather on starting long-run historical processes.

 We must initiate processes rather than occupy spaces.

 God manifests himself in time and is present in the processes of history.

 This gives priority to actions that give birth to new historical dynamics.

 And it requires patience, waiting.



Finding God in all things is not an ‘empirical eureka.

’ When we desire to encounter God, we would like to verify him immediately by an empirical method.

 But you cannot meet God this way.

 God is found in the gentle breeze perceived by Elijah.

 The senses that find God are the ones St.

 Ignatius called spiritual senses.

 Ignatius asks us to open our spiritual sensitivity to encounter God beyond a purely empirical approach.

 A contemplative attitude is necessary: it is the feeling that you are moving along the good path of understanding and affection toward things and situations.

 Profound peace, spiritual consolation, love of God and love of all things in God—this is the sign that you are on this right path.



Father Spadaro: So if the encounter with God is not an ‘empirical eureka,’ and if it is a journey that sees with the eyes of history, then we can also make mistakes?



Pope Francis: Yes, in this quest to seek and find God in all things there is still an area of uncertainty.

 There must be.

 If a person says that he met God with total certainty and is not touched by a margin of uncertainty, then this is not good.

 For me, this is an important key.

 If one has the answers to all the questions—that is the proof that God is not with him.

 It means that he is a false prophet using religion for himself.

 The great leaders of the people of God, like Moses, have always left room for doubt.

 You must leave room for the Lord, not for our certainties; we must be humble.

 Uncertainty is in every true discernment that is open to finding confirmation in spiritual consolation.



The risk in seeking and finding God in all things, then, is the willingness to explain too much, to say with human certainty and arrogance: ‘God is here.

’ We will find only a god that fits our measure.

 The correct attitude is that of St.

 Augustine: seek God to find him, and find God to keep searching for God forever.

 Often we seek as if we were blind, as one often reads in the Bible.

 And this is the experience of the great fathers of the faith, who are our models.

 We have to re-read the Letter to the Hebrews, Chapter 11.

 Abraham leaves his home without knowing where he was going, by faith.

 All of our ancestors in the faith died seeing the good that was promised, but from a distance.

.

.

.

 Our life is not given to us like an opera libretto, in which all is written down; but it means going, walking, doing, searching, seeing.

.

.

.

 We must enter into the adventure of the quest for meeting God; we must let God search and encounter us.



Because God is first; God is always first and makes the first move.

 God is a bit like the almond flower of your Sicily, Antonio, which always blooms first.

 We read it in the Prophets.

 God is encountered walking, along the path.

 At this juncture, someone might say that this is relativism.

 Is it relativism?

 Yes, if it is misunderstood as a kind of indistinct pantheism.

 It is not relativism if it is understood in the biblical sense, that God is always a surprise, so you never know where and how you will find him.

 You are not setting the time and place of the encounter with him.

 You must, therefore, discern the encounter.

 Discernment is essential.



If the Christian is a restorationist, a legalist, if he wants everything clear and safe, then he will find nothing.

 Tradition and memory of the past must help us to have the courage to open up new areas to God.

 Those who today always look for disciplinarian solutions, those who long for an exaggerated doctrinal ‘security,’ those who stubbornly try to recover a past that no longer exists­—they have a static and inward-directed view of things.

 In this way, faith becomes an ideology among other ideologies.

 I have a dogmatic certainty: God is in every person’s life.

 God is in everyone’s life.

 Even if the life of a person has been a disaster, even if it is destroyed by vices, drugs or anything else—God is in this person’s life.

 You can, you must try to seek God in every human life.

 Although the life of a person is a land full of thorns and weeds, there is always a space in which the good seed can grow.

 You have to trust God.



Father Spadaro: Do we have to be optimistic?

 What are the signs of hope in today’s world?

 How can I be optimistic in a world in crisis?



I do not like to use the word optimism because that is about a psychological attitude,” the pope says.

 “I like to use the word hope instead, according to what we read in the Letter to the Hebrews, Chapter 11, that I mentioned before.

 The fathers of the faith kept walking, facing difficulties.

 And hope does not disappoint, as we read in the Letter to the Romans.

 Think instead of the first riddle of Puccini’s opera ‘Turandot.

’

See, Christian hope is not a ghost and it does not deceive.

 It is a theological virtue and therefore, ultimately, a gift from God that cannot be reduced to optimism, which is only human.

 God does not mislead hope; God cannot deny himself.

 God is all promise.



Father Spadaro: Who are the artists and writers you prefer, and do they have something in common?



Pope Francis: I have really loved a diverse array of authors.

 I love very much Dostoevsky and Hölderlin.

 I remember Hölderlin for that poem written for the birthday of his grandmother that is very beautiful and was spiritually very enriching for me.

 The poem ends with the verse, ‘May the man hold fast to what the child has promised.

’ I was also impressed because I loved my grandmother Rosa, and in that poem Hölderlin compares his grandmother to the Virgin Mary, who gave birth to Jesus, the friend of the earth who did not consider anybody a foreigner.



I have read The Betrothed, by Alessandro Manzoni, three times, and I have it now on my table because I want to read it again.

 Manzoni gave me so much.

 When I was a child, my grandmother taught me by heart the beginning of The Betrothed: ‘That branch of Lake Como that turns off to the south between two unbroken chains of mountains.

.

.

.

’ I also liked Gerard Manley Hopkins very much.



Among the great painters, I admire Caravaggio; his paintings speak to me.

 But also Chagall, with his ‘White Crucifixion.

’ Among musicians I love Mozart, of course.

 The ‘Et incarnatus est’ from his Mass in C minor is matchless; it lifts you to God!
 I love Mozart performed by Clara Haskil.

 Mozart fulfills me.

 But I cannot think about his music; I have to listen to it.

 I like listening to Beethoven, but in a Promethean way, and the most Promethean interpreter for me is Furtwängler.

 And then Bach’s Passions.

 The piece by Bach that I love so much is the ‘Erbarme Dich,’ the tears of Peter in the ‘St.

 Matthew Passion.

’ Sublime.

 Then, at a different level, not intimate in the same way, I love Wagner.

 I like to listen to him, but not all the time.

 The performance of Wagner’s ‘Ring’ by Furtwängler at La Scala in Milan in 1950 is for me the best.

 But also the ‘Parsifal’ by Knappertsbusch in 1962.



We should also talk about the cinema.

 ‘La Strada,’ by Fellini, is the movie that perhaps I loved the most.

 I identify with this movie, in which there is an implicit reference to St.

 Francis.

 I also believe that I watched all of the Italian movies with Anna Magnani and Aldo Fabrizi when I was between 10 and 12 years old.

 Another film that I loved is ‘Rome, Open City.

’ I owe my film culture especially to my parents who used to take us to the movies quite often.



Anyway, in general I love tragic artists, especially classical ones.

 There is a nice definition that Cervantes puts on the lips of the bachelor Carrasco to praise the story of Don Quixote: ‘Children have it in their hands, young people read it, adults understand it, the elderly praise it.

’ For me this can be a good definition of the classics.



Father Spadaro: I ask the pope about teaching literature to his secondary school students.



Pope Francis: It was a bit risky.

 I had to make sure that my students read El Cid.

 But the boys did not like it.

 They wanted to read Garcia Lorca.

 Then I decided that they would study El Cid at home and that in class I would teach the authors the boys liked the most.

 Of course, young people wanted to read more ‘racy’ literary works, like the contemporary La Casada Infiel or classics like La Celestina, by Fernando de Rojas.

 But by reading these things they acquired a taste in literature, poetry, and we went on to other authors.

 And that was for me a great experience.

 I completed the program, but in an unstructured way—that is, not ordered according to what we expected in the beginning, but in an order that came naturally by reading these authors.

 And this mode befitted me: I did not like to have a rigid schedule, but rather I liked to know where we had to go with the readings, with a rough sense of where we were headed.

 Then I also started to get them to write.

 In the end I decided to send Borges two stories written by my boys.

 I knew his secretary, who had been my piano teacher.

 And Borges liked those stories very much.

 And then he set out to write the introduction to a collection of these writings.



Father Spadaro: Then, Holy Father, creativity is important for the life of a person?



Pope Francis: For a Jesuit it is extremely important!
 A Jesuit must be creative.



Father Spadaro: What should be the priorities of journals published by the Society of Jesus?



Pope Francis: The three key words that I commended to La Civiltà Cattolica can be extended to all the journals of the Society, perhaps with different emphases according to their natures and their objectives.

 When I insist on the frontier, I am referring in a particular way to the need for those who work in the world of culture to be inserted into the context in which they operate and on which they reflect.

 There is always the lurking danger of living in a laboratory.

 Ours is not a ‘lab faith,’ but a ‘journey faith,’ a historical faith.

 God has revealed himself as history, not as a compendium of abstract truths.

 I am afraid of laboratories because in the laboratory you take the problems and then you bring them home to tame them, to paint them, out of their context.

 You cannot bring home the frontier, but you have to live on the border and be audacious.



When it comes to social issues, it is one thing to have a meeting to study the problem of drugs in a slum neighborhood and quite another thing to go there, live there and understand the problem from the inside and study it.

 There is a brilliant letter by Father Arrupe to the Centers for Social Research and Action on poverty, in which he says clearly that one cannot speak of poverty if one does not experience poverty, with a direct connection to the places in which there is poverty.

 The word insertion is dangerous because some religious have taken it as a fad, and disasters have occurred because of a lack of discernment.

 But it is truly important.



The frontiers are many.

 Let us think of the religious sisters living in hospitals.

 They live on the frontier.

 I am alive because of one of them.

 When I went through my lung disease at the hospital, the doctor gave me penicillin and streptomycin in certain doses.

 The sister who was on duty tripled my doses because she was daringly astute; she knew what to do because she was with ill people all day.

 The doctor, who really was a good one, lived in his laboratory; the sister lived on the frontier and was in dialogue with it every day.

 Domesticating the frontier means just talking from a remote location, locking yourself up in a laboratory.

 Laboratories are useful, but reflection for us must always start from experience.



Father Spadaro: I ask Pope Francis about the enormous changes occurring in society and the way human beings are reinterpreting themselves.



Pope Francis: St.

 Vincent of Lerins makes a comparison between the biological development of man and the transmission from one era to another of the deposit of faith, which grows and is strengthened with time.

 Here, human self-understanding changes with time and so also human consciousness deepens.

 Let us think of when slavery was accepted or the death penalty was allowed without any problem.

 So we grow in the understanding of the truth.

 Exegetes and theologians help the church to mature in her own judgment.

 Even the other sciences and their development help the church in its growth in understanding.

 There are ecclesiastical rules and precepts that were once effective, but now they have lost value or meaning.

 The view of the church’s teaching as a monolith to defend without nuance or different understandings is wrong.



After all, in every age of history, humans try to understand and express themselves better.

 So human beings in time change the way they perceive themselves.

 It’s one thing for a man who expresses himself by carving the ‘Winged Victory of Samothrace,’ yet another for Caravaggio, Chagall and yet another still for Dalí.

 Even the forms for expressing truth can be multiform, and this is indeed necessary for the transmission of the Gospel in its timeless meaning.



Humans are in search of themselves, and, of course, in this search they can also make mistakes.

 The church has experienced times of brilliance, like that of Thomas Aquinas.

 But the church has lived also times of decline in its ability to think.

 For example, we must not confuse the genius of Thomas Aquinas with the age of decadent Thomist commentaries.

 Unfortunately, I studied philosophy from textbooks that came from decadent or largely bankrupt Thomism.

 In thinking of the human being, therefore, the church should strive for genius and not for decadence.



When does a formulation of thought cease to be valid?

 When it loses sight of the human or even when it is afraid of the human or deluded about itself.

 The deceived thought can be depicted as Ulysses encountering the song of the Siren, or as Tannhäuser in an orgy surrounded by satyrs and bacchantes, or as Parsifal, in the second act of Wagner’s opera, in the palace of Klingsor.

 The thinking of the church must recover genius and better understand how human beings understand themselves today, in order to develop and deepen the church’s teaching.



Father Spadaro: What is your preferred way to pray?



Pope Francis: I pray the breviary every morning.

 I like to pray with the psalms.

 Then, later, I celebrate Mass.

 I pray the Rosary.

 What I really prefer is adoration in the evening, even when I get distracted and think of other things, or even fall asleep praying.

 In the evening then, between seven and eight o’clock, I stay in front of the Blessed Sacrament for an hour in adoration.

 But I pray mentally even when I am waiting at the dentist or at other times of the day.



Prayer for me is always a prayer full of memory, of recollection, even the memory of my own history or what the Lord has done in his church or in a particular parish.

 For me it is the memory of which St.

 Ignatius speaks in the First Week of the Exercises in the encounter with the merciful Christ crucified.

 And I ask myself: ‘What have I done for Christ?

 What am I doing for Christ?

 What should I do for Christ?

’ It is the memory of which Ignatius speaks in the ‘Contemplation for Experiencing Divine Love,’ when he asks us to recall the gifts we have received.

 But above all, I also know that the Lord remembers me.

 I can forget about him, but I know that he never, ever forgets me.

 Memory has a fundamental role for the heart of a Jesuit: memory of grace, the memory mentioned in Deuteronomy, the memory of God’s works that are the basis of the covenant between God and the people.

 It is this memory that makes me his son and that makes me a father, too.



"In the course of this year, you have the honour and the responsibility of presiding over the Group of the twenty largest economies in the world.

 I am aware that the Russian Federation has participated in this group from the moment of its inception and has always had a positive role to play in the promotion of good governance of the world’s finances, which have been deeply affected by the crisis of 2008.


In today’s highly interdependent context, a global financial framework with its own just and clear rules is required in order to achieve a more equitable and fraternal world, in which it is possible to overcome hunger, ensure decent employment and housing for all, as well as essential healthcare.

 Your presidency of the G20 this year has committed itself to consolidating the reform of the international financial organizations and to achieving a consensus on financial standards suited to today’s circumstances.

 However, the world economy will only develop if it allows a dignified way of life for all human beings, from the eldest to the unborn child, not just for citizens of the G20 member states but for every inhabitant of the earth, even those in extreme social situations or in the remotest places.


From this standpoint, it is clear that, for the world’s peoples, armed conflicts are always a deliberate negation of international harmony, and create profound divisions and deep wounds which require many years to heal.

 Wars are a concrete refusal to pursue the great economic and social goals that the international community has set itself, as seen, for example, in the Millennium Development Goals.

 Unfortunately, the many armed conflicts which continue to afflict the world today present us daily with dramatic images of misery, hunger, illness and death.

 Without peace, there can be no form of economic development.

 Violence never begets peace, the necessary condition for development.


The meeting of the Heads of State and Government of the twenty most powerful economies, with two-thirds of the world’s population and ninety per cent of global GDP, does not have international security as its principal purpose.

 Nevertheless, the meeting will surely not forget the situation in the Middle East and particularly in Syria.

 It is regrettable that, from the very beginning of the conflict in Syria, one-sided interests have prevailed and in fact hindered the search for a solution that would have avoided the senseless massacre now unfolding.

 The leaders of the G20 cannot remain indifferent to the dramatic situation of the beloved Syrian people which has lasted far too long, and even risks bringing greater suffering to a region bitterly tested by strife and needful of peace.

 To the leaders present, to each and every one, I make a heartfelt appeal for them to help find ways to overcome the conflicting positions and to lay aside the futile pursuit of a military solution.

 Rather, let there be a renewed commitment to seek, with courage and determination, a peaceful solution through dialogue and negotiation of the parties, unanimously supported by the international community.

 Moreover, all governments have the moral duty to do everything possible to ensure humanitarian assistance to those suffering because of the conflict, both within and beyond the country’s borders.


Mr President, in the hope that these thoughts may be a valid spiritual contribution to your meeting, I pray for the successful outcome of the G20’s work on this occasion.

 I invoke an abundance of blessings upon the Summit in Saint Petersburg, upon the participants and the citizens of the member states, and upon the work and efforts of the 2013 Russian Presidency of the G20.


While requesting your prayers, I take this opportunity to assure you, Mr President, of my highest consideration.

"
Today, May 1st, we celebrate Saint Joseph the Worker and begin the month traditionally dedicated to Our Lady.

 In our encounter this morning, I want to focus on these two figures, so important in the life of Jesus, the Church and in our lives, with two brief thoughts: the first on work, the second on the contemplation of Jesus

1.

 In the Gospel of St.

 Matthew, in one of the moments when Jesus returns to his town, to Nazareth, and speaks in the synagogue, the amazement of his fellow townspeople at his wisdom is emphasized, and the question they ask: "Is not this the carpenter's son?

 "(13:55).

 Jesus comes into our history is among us, born of Mary by the power of God, but with the presence of Saint Joseph, the legal father who cares for him and also teaches him his work.

 Jesus is born and lives in a family, in the Holy Family, learning the craft of carpenter from Saint Joseph in his workshop in Nazareth, sharing with him the commitment, effort, satisfaction and also the difficulties of every day.


This reminds us of the dignity and importance of work.

 The book of Genesis tells us that God created man and woman entrusting them with the task of filling the earth and subduing it, which does not mean exploiting it, but nurturing and protecting it, caring for it through their work (cf.

 Gen 1:28; 2 15).

 Work is part of God’s loving plan, we are called to cultivate and care for all the goods of creation and in this way participate in the work of creation!
 Work is fundamental to the dignity of a person.

 Work, to use an image, "anoints" us with dignity, fills us with dignity, makes us similar to God, who has worked and still works, who always acts (cf.

 Jn 5:17); it gives you the ability to maintain ourselves, our family, to contribute to the growth of our nation.

 And here I think of the difficulties which, in various countries, today afflicts the world of work and business; I think of how many, and not just young people, are unemployed, many times due to a purely economic conception of society, which seeks selfish profit, beyond the parameters of social justice.


I wish to extend an invitation to solidarity to everyone, and I would like to encourage those in public office to make every effort to give new impetus to employment, this means caring for the dignity of the person, but above all I would say do not lose hope; St.

 Joseph also experienced moments of difficulty, but he never lost faith and was able to overcome them, in the certainty that God never abandons us.

 And then I would like to speak especially to you young people: be committed to your daily duties, your study, your work, to relationships of friendship, to helping towards others; your future also depends on how you live these precious years of your life.

 Do not be afraid of commitment, of sacrifice and do not look with fear towards the future; keep your hope alive: there is always a light on the horizon.


I would like to add a word about another particular work situation that concerns me: I am referring to what we could define as "slave labor", the work that enslaves.

 How many people worldwide are victims of this type of slavery, in which the person is at the service of his or her work, while work should offer a service to people so they may have dignity.

 I ask my brothers and sisters in faith and all men and women of good will for a decisive choice to combat trafficking in persons, which includes "slave labor".



2.

 In reference to the second thought: in the silence of daily events, St.

 Joseph, together with Mary, have one common center of attention: Jesus.

 They accompany and nurture, with commitment and tenderness, the growth of the Son of God made man for us, reflecting on everything that happened.

 In the Gospels, St.

 Luke twice emphasizes the attitude of Mary, which is also that of St.

 Joseph: "She kept all these things and pondered them in her heart" (2,19.

51).

 To listen to the Lord, we must learn to contemplate, feel His constant presence in our lives and we must stop and converse with Him, give him space in prayer.

 Each of us, even you boys and girls, young people, so many of you here this morning, should ask: how much space do I give to the Lord?

 Do I stop to talk with him?

 Ever since we were children, our parents have accustomed us to start and end the day with a prayer, to teach us to feel that the friendship and the love of God accompanies us.

 Let us remember the Lord more in our daily life!

And in this month of May, I would like to recall the importance and beauty of the prayer of the Holy Rosary.

 Reciting the Hail Mary, we are led to contemplate the mysteries of Jesus, that is, to reflect on the key moments of his life, so that, as with Mary and St.

 Joseph, He is the center of our thoughts, of our attention and our actions .

 It would be nice if, especially in this month of May, we could pray the Holy Rosary together in the family, with friends, in the parish, or some prayer to Jesus and the Virgin Mary!
 Praying together is a precious moment that further strengthens family life, friendship!
 Let us learn to pray more in the family and as a family!


Dear brothers and sisters, we ask Saint Joseph and the Virgin Mary, who teach us to be faithful to our daily tasks, to live our faith in the actions of everyday life and to give more space to the Lord in our lives, to stop to contemplate His face.


Vatican City: The following is the Vatican's official English translation of Pope Francis' speech "Urbi et Orbi" delivered in Italian from the central balcony of St Peter's Basilica.



"Brothers and sisters, good evening!


You know that it was the duty of the Conclave to give Rome a Bishop.

 It seems that my brother Cardinals have gone to the ends of the earth to get one.

.

.

 But here we are.

.

.

 I thank you for your welcome.

 The diocesan community of Rome now has its Bishop.

 Thank you!
 And first of all, I would like to offer a prayer for our Bishop Emeritus, Benedict XVI.

 Let us pray together for him, that the Lord may bless him and that Our Lady may keep him.



(Our Father.

.

.

 Hail Mary.

.

.

 Glory Be.

.

.

 )

And now, we take up this journey: Bishop and People.

 This journey of the Church of Rome which presides in charity over all the Churches.

 A journey of fraternity, of love, of trust among us.

 Let us always pray for one another.

 Let us pray for the whole world, that there may be a great spirit of fraternity.

 It is my hope for you that this journey of the Church, which we start today, and in which my Cardinal Vicar, here present, will assist me, will be fruitful for the evangelization of this most beautiful city.



And now I would like to give the blessing, but first I ask a favour of you: before the Bishop blesses his people, I ask you to pray to the Lord that he will bless me: the prayer of the people asking the blessing for their Bishop.

 Let us make, in silence, this prayer: your prayer over me.

 (.

.

.

)

Now I will give the Blessing to you and to the whole world, to all men and women of good will.

 (Blessing) Brothers and sisters, I leave you now.

 Thank you for your welcome.

 Pray for me and until we meet again.

 We will see each other soon.

 Tomorrow I wish to go and pray to Our Lady, that she may watch over all of Rome.

 Good night and sleep well!
.


If a person is gay and seeks God and has good will, who am I to judge him?

 The Catechism of the Catholic Church explains this very well.

 It says they should not be marginalized because of this (orientation) but that they must be integrated into society.



The problem is not having this orientation.

 We must be brothers.

 The problem is lobbying by this orientation, or lobbies of greedy people, political lobbies, Masonic lobbies, so many lobbies.

 This is the worse problem.



You see a lot written about the gay lobby.

 I still have not seen anyone in the Vatican with an identity card saying they are gay.



ON WOMEN PRIESTS

The Church has spoken and says 'no' that door is closed.

 "We cannot limit the role of women in the Church to altar girls or the president of a charity, there must be more.



But with regards to the ordination of women, the Church has spoken and says 'no'.

 Pope John Paul said so with a formula that was definitive.

 That door is closed.


It is now a long-established tradition that at the beginning of each new year the Pope meets the Diplomatic Corps accredited to the Holy See to offer his greetings and good wishes, and to share some reflections close to his heart as a pastor concerned for the joys and sufferings of humanity.
 Today’s meeting, therefore, is a source of great joy.
 It allows me to extend to you and your families, and to the civil authorities and the peoples whom you represent, my heartfelt best wishes for a new year of blessings and peace.

Before all else, I thank your Dean, Jean-Claude Michel, who has spoken in your name of the affection and esteem which binds your nations to the Apostolic See.
 I am happy to see you here in such great numbers, after having met you for the first time just a few days after my election.
 In the meantime, many new Ambassadors have taken up their duties and I welcome them once again.
 Among those who have left us, I cannot fail to mention the late Ambassador Alejandro Valladares Lanza, for many years the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps, whom the Lord called to himself several months ago.


The year just ended was particularly eventful, not only in the life of the Church but also in the context of the relations which the Holy See maintains with states and international organizations.
 I recall in particular the establishment of diplomatic relations with South Sudan, the signing of basic or specific accords with Cape Verde, Hungary and Chad, and the ratification of the accord with Equatorial Guinea signed in 2012.
 On the regional level too, the presence of the Holy See has expanded, both in Central America, where it became an Extra-Regional Observer to the Sistema de la Integración Centroamericana, and in Africa, with its accreditation as the first Permanent Observer to the Economic Community of West African States.


In my Message for the World Day of Peace, dedicated to fraternity as the foundation and pathway to peace, I observed that “fraternity is generally first learned within the family…”, for the family “by its vocation… is meant to spread its love to the world around it” and to contribute to the growth of that spirit of service and sharing which builds peace.
 This is the message of the Crib, where we see the Holy Family, not alone and isolated from the world, but surrounded by shepherds and the Magi, that is by an open community in which there is room for everyone, poor and rich alike, those near and those afar.
 In this way we can appreciate the insistence of my beloved predecessor Benedict XVI that “the language of the family is a language of peace”.


Sadly, this is often not the case, as the number of broken and troubled families is on the rise, not simply because of the weakening sense of belonging so typical of today’s world, but also because of the adverse conditions in which many families are forced to live, even to the point where they lack basic means of subsistence.
 There is a need for suitable policies aimed at supporting, assisting and strengthening the family!


It also happens that the elderly are looked upon as a burden, while young people lack clear prospects for their lives.
 Yet the elderly and the young are the hope of humanity.
 The elderly bring with them wisdom born of experience; the young open us to the future and prevent us from becoming self-absorbed.
 It is prudent to keep the elderly from being ostracized from the life of society, so as to preserve the living memory of each people.
 It is likewise important to invest in the young through suitable initiatives which can help them to find employment and establish homes.
 We must not stifle their enthusiasm!
 I vividly recall my experience at the Twenty-Eighth World Youth Day in Rio de Janeiro.
 I met so many happy young people!
 What great hope and expectation is present in their eyes and in their prayers!
 What a great thirst for life and a desire for openness to others!
 Being closed and isolated always makes for a stifling, heavy atmosphere which sooner or later ends up creating sadness and oppression.
 What is needed instead is a shared commitment to favouring a culture of encounter, for only those able to reach out to others are capable of bearing fruit, creating bonds of communion, radiating joy and being peacemakers.


The scenes of destruction and death which we have witnessed in the past year confirm all this – if ever we needed such confirmation.
 How much pain and desperation are caused by self-centredness which gradually takes the form of envy, selfishness, competition and the thirst for power and money!
 At times it seems that these realities are destined to have the upper hand.
 Christmas, on the other hand, inspires in us Christians the certainty that the final, definitive word belongs to the Prince of Peace, who changes “swords into plowshares and spears into pruning hooks” (cf.
 Is 2:4), transforming selfishness into self-giving and revenge into forgiveness.


It is with this confidence that I wish to look to the year ahead.
 I continue to be hopeful that the conflict in Syria will finally come to an end.
 Concern for that beloved people, and a desire to avert the worsening of violence, moved me last September to call for a day of fasting and prayer.
 Through you I heartily thank all those in your countries – public authorities and people of good will – who joined in this initiative.
 What is presently needed is a renewed political will to end the conflict.
 In this regard, I express my hope that the Geneva 2 Conference, to be held on 22 January, will mark the beginning of the desired peace process.
 At the same time, full respect for humanitarian law remains essential.
 It is unacceptable that unarmed civilians, especially children, become targets.
 I also encourage all parties to promote and ensure in every way possible the provision of urgently-needed aid to much of the population, without overlooking the praiseworthy effort of those countries – especially Lebanon and Jordan – which have generously welcomed to their territory numerous refugees from Syria.


Remaining in the Middle East, I note with concern the tensions affecting the region in various ways.
 I am particularly concerned by the ongoing political problems in Lebanon, where a climate of renewed cooperation between the different components of civil society and the political powers is essential for avoiding the further hostilities which would undermine the stability of the country.
 I think too of Egypt, with its need to regain social harmony, and Iraq, which struggles to attain the peace and stability for which it hopes.
 At the same time, I note with satisfaction the significant progress made in the dialogue between Iran and the Group of 5+1 on the nuclear issue.


Everywhere, the way to resolve open questions must be that of diplomacy and dialogue.
 This is the royal road already indicated with utter clarity by Pope Benedict XV when he urged the leaders of the European nations to make “the moral force of law” prevail over the “material force of arms” in order to end that “needless carnage” which was the First World War, whose centenary occurs this year.
 What is needed is courage “to go beyond the surface of the conflict” and to consider others in their deepest dignity, so that unity will prevail over conflict and it will be “possible to build communion amid disagreement”.
 In this regard, the resumption of peace talks between Israelis and Palestinians is a positive sign, and I express my hope that both parties will resolve, with the support of the international community, to take courageous decisions aimed at finding a just and lasting solution to a conflict which urgently needs to end.
 I myself intend to make a pilgrimage of peace to the Holy Land in the course of this year.
 The exodus of Christians from the Middle East and North Africa continues to be a source of concern.
 They want to continue to be a part of the social, political and cultural life of countries which they helped to build, and they desire to contribute to the common good of societies where they wish to be fully accepted as agents of peace and reconciliation.


In other parts of Africa as well, Christians are called to give witness to God’s love and mercy.
 We must never cease to do good, even when it is difficult and demanding, and when we endure acts of intolerance if not genuine persecution.
 In vast areas of Nigeria violence persists, and much innocent blood continues to be spilt.
 I think above all of the Central African Republic, where much suffering has been caused as a result of the country’s tensions, which have frequently led to devastation and death.
 As I assure you of my prayers for the victims and the many refugees, forced to live in dire poverty, I express my hope that the concern of the international community will help to bring an end to violence, a return to the rule of law and guaranteed access to humanitarian aid, also in the remotest parts of the country.
 For her part, the Catholic Church will continue to assure her presence and cooperation, working generously to help people in every possible way and, above all, to rebuild a climate of reconciliation and of peace among all groups in society.
 Reconciliation and peace are likewise fundamental priorities in other parts of Africa.
 I think in particular of Mali, where we nonetheless note the promising restoration of the country’s democratic structures, and of South Sudan, where, on the contrary, political instability has lately led to many deaths and a new humanitarian crisis.


The Holy See is also closely following events in Asia, where the Church desires to share the joys and hopes of all the peoples of that vast and noble continent.
 On this, the fiftieth anniversary of diplomatic relations with the Republic of Korea, I wish to implore from God the gift of reconciliation on the peninsula, and I trust that, for the good of all the Korean people, the interested parties will tirelessly seek out points of agreement and possible solutions.
 Asia, in fact, has a long history of peaceful coexistence between its different civil, ethnic and religious groups.
 Such reciprocal respect needs to be encouraged, especially given certain troubling signs that it is weakening, particularly where growing attitudes of prejudice, for allegedly religious reasons, are tending to deprive Christians of their liberties and to jeopardize civil coexistence.
 The Holy See looks, instead, with lively hope to the signs of openness coming from countries of great religious and cultural traditions, with whom it wishes to cooperate in the pursuit of the common good.


Peace is also threatened by every denial of human dignity, firstly the lack of access to adequate nutrition.
 We cannot be indifferent to those suffering from hunger, especially children, when we think of how much food is wasted every day in many parts of the world immersed in what I have often termed “the throwaway culture”.
 Unfortunately, what is thrown away is not only food and dispensable objects, but often human beings themselves, who are discarded as “unnecessary”.
 For example, it is frightful even to think there are children, victims of abortion, who will never see the light of day; children being used as soldiers, abused and killed in armed conflicts; and children being bought and sold in that terrible form of modern slavery which is human trafficking, which is a crime against humanity.


Nor can we be unmoved by the tragedies which have forced so many people to flee from famine, violence and oppression, particularly in the Horn of Africa and in the Great Lakes Region.
 Many of these are living as fugitives or refugees in camps where they are no longer seen as persons but as nameless statistics.
 Others, in the hope of a better life, have undertaken perilous journeys which not infrequently end in tragedy.
 I think in particular of the many migrants from Latin America bound for the United States, but above all of all those from Africa and the Middle East who seek refuge in Europe.


Still vivid in my memory is the brief visit I made to Lampedusa last July, to pray for the numerous victims of the refugee crisis in the Mediterranean.
 Sadly, there is a general indifference in the face of these tragedies, which is a dramatic sign of the loss of that “sense of responsibility for our brothers and sisters”, on which every civil society is based.
 On that occasion I was also able to observe the hospitality and dedication shown by so many people.
 It is my hope that the Italian people, whom I regard with affection, not least for the common roots which unite us, will renew their praiseworthy commitment of solidarity towards the weakest and most vulnerable, and, with generous and coordinated efforts by citizens and institutions, overcome present difficulties and regain their long-standing climate of constructive social creativity.


Finally, I wish to mention another threat to peace, which arises from the greedy exploitation of environmental resources.
 Even if “nature is at our disposition”, all too often we do not “respect it or consider it a gracious gift which we must care for and set at the service of our brothers and sisters, including future generations”.
 Here too what is crucial is responsibility on the part of all in pursuing, in a spirit of fraternity, policies respectful of this earth which is our common home.
 I recall a popular saying: “God always forgives, we sometimes forgive, but when nature – creation – is mistreated, she never forgives!
”.
 We have also witnessed the devastating effects of several recent natural disasters.
 In particular, I would mention once more the numerous victims and the great devastation caused in the Philippines and other countries of Southeast Asia as a result of typhoon Haiyan.

I am pleased to welcome you, Mr Secretary-General and the leading executive officers of the Agencies, Funds and Programmes of the United Nations and specialized Organizations, as you gather in Rome for the biannual meeting for strategic coordination of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board.


It is significant that today’s meeting takes place shortly after the solemn canonization of my predecessors, Popes John XXIII and John Paul II.
 The new saints inspire us by their passionate concern for integral human development and for understanding between peoples.
 This concern was concretely expressed by the numerous visits of John Paul II to the Organizations headquartered in Rome and by his travels to New York, Geneva, Vienna, Nairobi and The Hague.


I thank you, Mr Secretary-General, for your cordial words of introduction.
 I thank all of you, who are primarily responsible for the international system, for the great efforts being made to ensure world peace, respect for human dignity, the protection of persons, especially the poorest and most vulnerable, and harmonious economic and social development.


The results of the Millennium Development Goals, especially in terms of education and the decrease in extreme poverty, confirm the value of the work of coordination carried out by this Chief Executives Board.
 At the same time, it must be kept in mind that the world’s peoples deserve and expect even greater results.


An essential principle of management is the refusal to be satisfied with current results and to press forward, in the conviction that those gains are only consolidated by working to achieve even more.
 In the case of global political and economic organization, much more needs to be achieved, since an important part of humanity does not share in the benefits of progress and is in fact relegated to the status of second-class citizens.
 Future Sustainable Development Goals must therefore be formulated and carried out with generosity and courage, so that they can have a real impact on the structural causes of poverty and hunger, attain more substantial results in protecting the environment, ensure dignified and productive labor for all, and provide appropriate protection for the family, which is an essential element in sustainable human and social development.
 Specifically, this involves challenging all forms of injustice and resisting the “economy of exclusion”, the “throwaway culture” and the “culture of death” which nowadays sadly risk becoming passively accepted.


With this in mind, I would like to remind you, as representatives of the chief agencies of global cooperation, of an incident which took place two thousand years ago and is recounted in the Gospel of Saint Luke (19:1-10).
 It is the encounter between Jesus Christ and the rich tax collector Zacchaeus, as a result of which Zacchaeus made a radical decision of sharing and justice, because his conscience had been awakened by the gaze of Jesus.
 This same spirit should be at the beginning and end of all political and economic activity.
 The gaze, often silent, of that part of the human family which is cast off, left behind, ought to awaken the conscience of political and economic agents and lead them to generous and courageous decisions with immediate results, like the decision of Zacchaeus.
 Does this spirit of solidarity and sharing guide all our thoughts and actions, I ask myself?


Today, in concrete terms, an awareness of the dignity of each of our brothers and sisters whose life is sacred and inviolable from conception to natural death must lead us to share with complete freedom the goods which God’s providence has placed in our hands, material goods but also intellectual and spiritual ones, and to give back generously and lavishly whatever we may have earlier unjustly refused to others.


The account of Jesus and Zacchaeus teaches us that above and beyond economic and social systems and theories, there will always be a need to promote generous, effective and practical openness to the needs of others.
 Jesus does not ask Zacchaeus to change jobs nor does he condemn his financial activity; he simply inspires him to put everything, freely yet immediately and indisputably, at the service of others.
 Consequently, I do not hesitate to state, as did my predecessors (cf.
 JOHN PAUL II, Sollicitudo Rei Socialis, 42-43; Centesimus Annus, 43; BENEDICT XVI, Caritas in Veritate, 6; 24-40), that equitable economic and social progress can only be attained by joining scientific and technical abilities with an unfailing commitment to solidarity accompanied by a generous and disinterested spirit of gratuitousness at every level.
 A contribution to this equitable development will also be made both by international activity aimed at the integral human development of all the world’s peoples and by the legitimate redistribution of economic benefits by the State, as well as indispensable cooperation between the private sector and civil society.


Consequently, while encouraging you in your continuing efforts to coordinate the activity of the international agencies, which represents a service to all humanity, I urge you to work together in promoting a true, worldwide ethical mobilization which, beyond all differences of religious or political convictions, will spread and put into practice a shared ideal of fraternity and solidarity, especially with regard to the poorest and those most excluded.


Invoking divine guidance on the work of your Board, I also implore God’s special blessing for you, Mr Secretary-General, for the Presidents, Directors and Secretaries General present among us, and for all the personnel of the United Nations and the other international Agencies and Bodies, and their respective families.
 Thank you very much.

I am most grateful for your invitation to address this joint session of Congress in “the land of the free and the home of the brave.
" I would like to think that the reason for this is that I, too, am a son of this great continent, from which we have all received so much and toward which we share a common responsibility.


Each son or daughter of a given country has a mission, a personal and social responsibility.
 Your own responsibility as members of Congress is to enable this country, by your legislative activity, to grow as a nation.
 You are the face of its people, their representatives.
 You are called to defend and preserve the dignity of your fellow citizens in the tireless and demanding pursuit of the common good, for this is the chief aim of all politics.
 A political society endures when it seeks, as a vocation, to satisfy common needs by stimulating the growth of all its members, especially those in situations of greater vulnerability or risk.
 Legislative activity is always based on care for the people.
 To this you have been invited, called and convened by those who elected you.


Yours is a work which makes me reflect in two ways on the figure of Moses.
 On the one hand, the patriarch and lawgiver of the people of Israel symbolizes the need of peoples to keep alive their sense of unity by means of just legislation.
 On the other, the figure of Moses leads us directly to God and thus to the transcendent dignity of the human being.
 Moses provides us with a good synthesis of your work: you are asked to protect, by means of the law, the image and likeness fashioned by God on every human face.


Today, I would like not only to address you, but through you the entire people of the United States.
 Here, together with their representatives, I would like to take this opportunity to dialogue with the many thousands of men and women who strive each day to do an honest day’s work, to bring home their daily bread, to save money and — one step at a time — to build a better life for their families.
 These are men and women who are not concerned simply with paying their taxes, but in their own quiet way sustain the life of society.
 They generate solidarity by their actions, and they create organizations which offer a helping hand to those most in need

I would also like to enter into dialogue with the many elderly persons who are a storehouse of wisdom forged by experience, and who seek in many ways, especially through volunteer work, to share their stories and their insights.
 I know that many of them are retired, but still active; they keep working to build up this land.
 I also want to dialogue with all those young people who are working to realize their great and noble aspirations, who are not led astray by facile proposals, and who face difficult situations, often as a result of immaturity on the part of many adults.
 I wish to dialogue with all of you, and I would like to do so through the historical memory of your people.


My visit takes place at a time when men and women of good will are marking the anniversaries of several great Americans.
 The complexities of history and the reality of human weakness notwithstanding, these men and women, for all their many differences and limitations, were able by hard work and self-sacrifice — some at the cost of their lives — to build a better future.
 They shaped fundamental values which will endure forever in the spirit of the American people.
 A people with this spirit can live through many crises, tensions and conflicts, while always finding the resources to move forward, and to do so with dignity.
 These men and women offer us a way of seeing and interpreting reality.
 In honoring their memory, we are inspired, even amid conflicts, and in the here and now of each day, to draw upon our deepest cultural reserves.


I would like to mention four of these Americans: Abraham Lincoln, Martin Luther King, Dorothy Day and Thomas Merton.


This year marks the 150th anniversary of the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln, the guardian of liberty, who labored tirelessly that “this nation, under God, might have a new birth of freedom.
" Building a future of freedom requires love of the common good and cooperation in a spirit of subsidiarity and solidarity.


All of us are quite aware of, and deeply worried by, the disturbing social and political situation of the world today.
 Our world is increasingly a place of violent conflict, hatred and brutal atrocities, committed even in the name of God and of religion.
 We know that no religion is immune from forms of individual delusion or ideological extremism.
 This means that we must be especially attentive to every type of fundamentalism, whether religious or of any other kind.
 A delicate balance is required to combat violence perpetrated in the name of a religion, an ideology or an economic system, while also safeguarding religious freedom, intellectual freedom and individual freedoms.
 But there is another temptation which we must especially guard against: the simplistic reductionism which sees only good or evil; or, if you will, the righteous and sinners.
 The contemporary world, with its open wounds which affect so many of our brothers and sisters, demands that we confront every form of polarization which would divide it into these two camps.
 We know that in the attempt to be freed of the enemy without, we can be tempted to feed the enemy within.
 To imitate the hatred and violence of tyrants and murderers is the best way to take their place.
 That is something which you, as a people, reject.


Our response must instead be one of hope and healing, of peace and justice.
 We are asked to summon the courage and the intelligence to resolve today’s many geopolitical and economic crises.
 Even in the developed world, the effects of unjust structures and actions are all too apparent.
 Our efforts must aim at restoring hope, righting wrongs, maintaining commitments, and thus promoting the well-being of individuals and of peoples.
 We must move forward together, as one, in a renewed spirit of fraternity and solidarity, cooperating generously for the common good.


The challenges facing us today call for a renewal of that spirit of cooperation, which has accomplished so much good throughout the history of the United States.
 The complexity, the gravity and the urgency of these challenges demand that we pool our resources and talents, and resolve to support one another, with respect for our differences and our convictions of conscience.


In this land, the various religious denominations have greatly contributed to building and strengthening society.
 It is important that today, as in the past, the voice of faith continues to be heard, for it is a voice of fraternity and love, which tries to bring out the best in each person and in each society.
 Such cooperation is a powerful resource in the battle to eliminate new global forms of slavery, born of grave injustices which can be overcome only through new policies and new forms of social consensus.


Politics is, instead, an expression of our compelling need to live as one, in order to build as one the greatest common good: that of a community which sacrifices particular interests in order to share, in justice and peace, its goods, its interests, its social life.
 I do not underestimate the difficulty that this involves, but I encourage you in this effort.


Here, too, I think of the march which Martin Luther King led from Selma to Montgomery 50 years ago as part of the campaign to fulfill his “dream” of full civil and political rights for African Americans.
 That dream continues to inspire us all.
 I am happy that America continues to be, for many, a land of “dreams.
" Dreams which lead to action, to participation, to commitment.
 Dreams which awaken what is deepest and truest in the life of a people.


In recent centuries, millions of people came to this land to pursue their dream of building a future in freedom.
 We, the people of this continent, are not fearful of foreigners, because most of us were once foreigners.
 I say this to you as the son of immigrants, knowing that so many of you are also descended from immigrants.
 Tragically, the rights of those who were here long before us were not always respected.
 For those peoples and their nations, from the heart of American democracy, I wish to reaffirm my highest esteem and appreciation.
 Those first contacts were often turbulent and violent, but it is difficult to judge the past by the criteria of the present.
 Nonetheless, when the stranger in our midst appeals to us, we must not repeat the sins and the errors of the past.
 We must resolve now to live as nobly and as justly as possible, as we educate new generations not to turn their back on our “neighbors” and everything around us.
 Building a nation calls us to recognize that we must constantly relate to others, rejecting a mindset of hostility in order to adopt one of reciprocal subsidiarity, in a constant effort to do our best.
 I am confident that we can do this.


Our world is facing a refugee crisis of a magnitude not seen since the Second World War.
 This presents us with great challenges and many hard decisions.
 On this continent, too, thousands of persons are led to travel north in search of a better life for themselves and for their loved ones, in search of greater opportunities.
 Is this not what we want for our own children?
 We must not be taken aback by their numbers, but rather view them as persons, seeing their faces and listening to their stories, trying to respond as best we can to their situation.
 To respond in a way which is always humane, just and fraternal.
 We need to avoid a common temptation nowadays: to discard whatever proves troublesome.
 Let us remember the Golden Rule: “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you”.


This rule points us in a clear direction.
 Let us treat others with the same passion and compassion with which we want to be treated.
 Let us seek for others the same possibilities which we seek for ourselves.
 Let us help others to grow, as we would like to be helped ourselves.
 In a word, if we want security, let us give security; if we want life, let us give life; if we want opportunities, let us provide opportunities.
 The yardstick we use for others will be the yardstick which time will use for us.
 The Golden Rule also reminds us of our responsibility to protect and defend human life at every stage of its development.


This conviction has led me, from the beginning of my ministry, to advocate at different levels for the global abolition of the death penalty.
 I am convinced that this way is the best, since every life is sacred, every human person is endowed with an inalienable dignity, and society can only benefit from the rehabilitation of those convicted of crimes.
 Recently, my brother bishops here in the United States renewed their call for the abolition of the death penalty.
 Not only do I support them, but I also offer encouragement to all those who are convinced that a just and necessary punishment must never exclude the dimension of hope and the goal of rehabilitation.


In these times when social concerns are so important, I cannot fail to mention the servant of God Dorothy Day, who founded the Catholic Worker Movement.
 Her social activism, her passion for justice and for the cause of the oppressed, were inspired by the Gospel, her faith and the example of the saints.


How much progress has been made in this area in so many parts of the world!
 How much has been done in these first years of the third millennium to raise people out of extreme poverty!
 I know that you share my conviction that much more still needs to be done, and that in times of crisis and economic hardship a spirit of global solidarity must not be lost.
 At the same time I would encourage you to keep in mind all those people around us who are trapped in a cycle of poverty.
 They too need to be given hope.
 The fight against poverty and hunger must be fought constantly and on many fronts, especially in its causes.
 I know that many Americans today, as in the past, are working to deal with this problem.


It goes without saying that part of this great effort is the creation and distribution of wealth.
 The right use of natural resources, the proper application of technology and the harnessing of the spirit of enterprise are essential elements of an economy which seeks to be modern, inclusive and sustainable.
 “Business is a noble vocation, directed to producing wealth and improving the world.
 It can be a fruitful source of prosperity for the area in which it operates, especially if it sees the creation of jobs as an essential part of its service to the common good”.
 This common good also includes the Earth, a central theme of the encyclical which I recently wrote in order to “enter into dialogue with all people about our common home”.
 “We need a conversation which includes everyone, since the environmental challenge we are undergoing, and its human roots, concern and affect us all”.


In Laudato Si’, I call for a courageous and responsible effort to “redirect our steps”, and to avert the most serious effects of the environmental deterioration caused by human activity.
 I am convinced that we can make a difference and I have no doubt that the United States — and this Congress — have an important role to play.
 Now is the time for courageous actions and strategies, aimed at implementing a “culture of care" and “an integrated approach to combating poverty, restoring dignity to the excluded, and at the same time protecting nature” .
 “We have the freedom needed to limit and direct technology”; “to devise intelligent ways of … developing and limiting our power”; and to put technology “at the service of another type of progress, one which is healthier, more human, more social, more integral”.
 In this regard, I am confident that America’s outstanding academic and research institutions can make a vital contribution in the years ahead.


A century ago, at the beginning of the Great War, which Pope Benedict XV termed a “pointless slaughter,” another notable American was born: the Cistercian monk Thomas Merton.
 He remains a source of spiritual inspiration and a guide for many people.
 In his autobiography, he wrote: “I came into the world.
 Free by nature, in the image of God, I was nevertheless the prisoner of my own violence and my own selfishness, in the image of the world into which I was born.
 That world was the picture of Hell, full of men like myself, loving God, and yet hating him; born to love him, living instead in fear of hopeless self-contradictory hungers.
" Merton was above all a man of prayer, a thinker who challenged the certitudes of his time and opened new horizons for souls and for the Church.
 He was also a man of dialogue, a promoter of peace between peoples and religions.


From this perspective of dialogue, I would like to recognize the efforts made in recent months to help overcome historic differences linked to painful episodes of the past.
 It is my duty to build bridges and to help all men and women, in any way possible, to do the same.
 When countries which have been at odds resume the path of dialogue — a dialogue which may have been interrupted for the most legitimate of reasons — new opportunities open up for all.
 This has required, and requires, courage and daring, which is not the same as irresponsibility.
 A good political leader is one who, with the interests of all in mind, seizes the moment in a spirit of openness and pragmatism.
 A good political leader always opts to initiate processes rather than possessing spaces.


Being at the service of dialogue and peace also means being truly determined to minimize and, in the long term, to end the many armed conflicts throughout our world.
 Here we have to ask ourselves: Why are deadly weapons being sold to those who plan to inflict untold suffering on individuals and society?
 Sadly, the answer, as we all know, is simply for money: money that is drenched in blood, often innocent blood.
 In the face of this shameful and culpable silence, it is our duty to confront the problem and to stop the arms trade.


Three sons and a daughter of this land, four individuals and four dreams: Lincoln, liberty; Martin Luther King, liberty in plurality and non-exclusion; Dorothy Day, social justice and the rights of persons; and Thomas Merton, the capacity for dialogue and openness to God.


Four representatives of the American people.


I will end my visit to your country in Philadelphia, where I will take part in the World Meeting of Families.
 It is my wish that throughout my visit the family should be a recurrent theme.
 How essential the family has been to the building of this country!
 And how worthy it remains of our support and encouragement!
 Yet I cannot hide my concern for the family, which is threatened, perhaps as never before, from within and without.
 Fundamental relationships are being called into question, as is the very basis of marriage and the family.
 I can only reiterate the importance and, above all, the richness and the beauty of family life.


In particular, I would like to call attention to those family members who are the most vulnerable, the young.
 For many of them, a future filled with countless possibilities beckons, yet so many others seem disoriented and aimless, trapped in a hopeless maze of violence, abuse and despair.
 Their problems are our problems.
 We cannot avoid them.
 We need to face them together, to talk about them and to seek effective solutions rather than getting bogged down in discussions.
 At the risk of oversimplifying, we might say that we live in a culture which pressures young people not to start a family, because they lack possibilities for the future.
 Yet this same culture presents others with so many options that they too are dissuaded from starting a family.


A nation can be considered great when it defends liberty as Lincoln did, when it fosters a culture which enables people to “dream” of full rights for all their brothers and sisters, as Martin Luther King sought to do; when it strives for justice and the cause of the oppressed, as Dorothy Day did by her tireless work, the fruit of a faith which becomes dialogue and sows peace in the contemplative style of Thomas Merton.


In these remarks, I have sought to present some of the richness of your cultural heritage, of the spirit of the American people.
 It is my desire that this spirit continue to develop and grow, so that as many young people as possible can inherit and dwell in a land which has inspired so many people to dream.


God bless America!

“Doing good” is a principle that unites all humanity, beyond the diversity of ideologies and religions, and creates the “culture of encounter” that is the foundation of peace: this is what Pope said at Mass this morning at the Domus Santae Martae, in the presence of employees of the Governorate of Vatican City.
 Cardinal Bechara Boutros Rai, Patriarch of Antioch of the Maronites, concelebrated at the Mass.


Wednesday’s Gospel speaks to us about the disciples who prevented a person from outside their group from doing good.
 “They complain,” the Pope said in his homily, because they say, “If he is not one of us, he cannot do good.
 If he is not of our party, he cannot do good.
” And Jesus corrects them: “Do not hinder him, he says, let him do good.
” The disciples, Pope Francis explains, “were a little intolerant,” closed off by the idea of possessing the truth, convinced that “those who do not have the truth, cannot do good.
” “This was wrong .
 .
 .
 Jesus broadens the horizon.
” Pope Francis said, “The root of this possibility of doing good – that we all have – is in creation”.


"The Lord created us in His image and likeness, and we are the image of the Lord, and He does good and all of us have this commandment at heart: do good and do not do evil.
 All of us.
 ‘But, Father, this is not Catholic!
 He cannot do good.
’ Yes, he can.
 He must.
 Not can: must!
 Because he has this commandment within him.
 Instead, this ‘closing off’ that imagines that those outside, everyone, cannot do good is a wall that leads to war and also to what some people throughout history have conceived of: killing in the name of God.
 That we can kill in the name of God.
 And that, simply, is blasphemy.
 To say that you can kill in the name of God is blasphemy.
”

“Instead,” the Pope continued, “the Lord has created us in His image and likeness, and has given us this commandment in the depths of our heart: do good and do not do evil”:

"The Lord has redeemed all of us, all of us, with the Blood of Christ: all of us, not just Catholics.
 Everyone!
 ‘Father, the atheists?
’ Even the atheists.
 Everyone!
 And this Blood makes us children of God of the first class!
 We are created children in the likeness of God and the Blood of Christ has redeemed us all!
 And we all have a duty to do good.
 And this commandment for everyone to do good, I think, is a beautiful path towards peace.
 If we, each doing our own part, if we do good to others, if we meet there, doing good, and we go slowly, gently, little by little, we will make that culture of encounter: we need that so much.
 We must meet one another doing good.
 ‘But I don’t believe, Father, I am an atheist!
’ But do good: we will meet one another there.
”

“Doing good” the Pope explained, is not a matter of faith: “It is a duty, it is an identity card that our Father has given to all of us, because He has made us in His image and likeness.
 And He does good, always.
”

This was the final prayer of Pope Francis:

Today is [the feast of] Santa Rita, Patron Saint of impossible things – but this seems impossible: let us ask of her this grace, this grace that all, all, all people would do good and that we would encounter one another in this work, which is a work of creation, like the creation of the Father.
 A work of the family, because we are all children of God, all of us, all of us!
 And God loves us, all of us!
 May Santa Rita grant us this grace, which seems almost impossible.
 Amen.

I greet all of you with great affection in the Lord.
 I am happy that we are able to meet in this Cathedral of the Transfiguration of the Lord.
 This house of prayer, along with many others, has been repaired thanks to the remarkable generosity of many people.
 It stands as an eloquent sign of the immense effort of rebuilding which you and your neighbors have undertaken in the wake of the devastation caused by Typhoon Yolanda.
 It is also a concrete reminder to all of us that, even amid disaster and suffering, our God is constantly at work, making all things new.


Many of you have suffered greatly, not only from the destruction caused by the storm, but from the loss of family members and friends.
 Today let us commend to God’s mercy all those who have died, and invoke his consolation and peace upon all who still grieve.
 May we remember in a particular way those among us whose pain makes it hard to see the way forward.
 At the same time, let us thank the Lord for all those who have labored in these months to clear away the rubble, to visit the sick and dying, to comfort the grieving and to bury the dead.
 Their goodness, and the generous aid which came from so many people throughout the world, are a real sign that God never abandons us!


Here, in a special way, I would like to thank the many priests and religious who responded with such overwhelming generosity to the desperate needs of the people of the areas hardest hit.
 By your presence and your charity, you bore witness to the beauty and truth of the Gospel.
 You made the Church present as a source of hope, healing and mercy.
 Together with so many of your neighbors, you also demonstrated the deep faith and the resilience of the Filipino people.
 The many stories of goodness and self-sacrifice which emerged from these dark days need to be remembered and passed down for future generations.


A few moments ago, I blessed the new Center for the Poor, which stands as another sign of the Church’s care and concern for our brothers and sisters in need.
 How many they are!
 And how much our Lord loves them!
 Today, from this place which has known such profound suffering and human need, I ask that even more be done for the poor.
 Above all, I ask that the poor throughout this country be treated fairly – that their dignity be respected, that political and economic policies be just and inclusive, that opportunities for employment and education be developed, and that obstacles to the delivery of social services be removed.
 Our treatment of the poor is the criterion on which each of us will be judged (cf.
 Mt 25:40, 45).
 I ask all of you, and all responsible for the good of society, to renew your commitment to social justice and the betterment of the poor, both here and in the Philippines as a whole.


Finally, I would like to say a word of sincere thanks to the young people present, including the seminarians and young religious.
 Many of you showed heroic generosity in the aftermath of the typhoon.
 I hope that you will always realize that true happiness comes from helping others, giving ourselves to them in self-sacrifice, mercy and compassion.
 In this way you will be a powerful force for the renewal of society, not only in the work of restoring buildings but more importantly, in building up God’s kingdom of holiness, justice and peace in your native land.


Dear priests and religious, dear families and friends, in this Cathedral of the Transfiguration of the Lord let us ask that our lives continue to be sustained and transfigured by the power of his resurrection.
 I commend all of you to the loving protection of Mary, Mother of the Church.
 May she obtain for you, and for all the beloved people of these lands, the Lord’s blessings of comfort, joy and peace.
 God bless you all!

Venerable Brothers in the Episcopate and in the Priesthood!
 Distinguished Authorities!
 Dear brothers and sisters!
 Thank you for coming in such large numbers to this last General Audience of my pontificate.


Like the Apostle Paul in the biblical text that we have heard, I feel in my heart the paramount duty to thank God, who guides the Church and makes her grow: who sows His Word and thus nourishes the faith in His people.
 At this moment my spirit reaches out to embrace the whole Church throughout the world, and I thank God for the “news” that in these years of Petrine ministry I have been able to receive regarding the faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and the charity that circulates in the body of the Church – charity that makes the Church to live in love – and of the hope that opens for us the way towards the fullness of life, and directs us towards the heavenly homeland.


I feel I [ought to] carry everyone in prayer, in a present that is God’s, where I recall every meeting, every voyage, every pastoral visit.
 I gather everyone and every thing in prayerful recollection, in order to entrust them to the Lord: in order that we might have full knowledge of His will, with every wisdom and spiritual understanding, and in order that we might comport ourselves in a manner that is worthy of Him, of His, bearing fruit in every good work (cf.
 Col 1:9-10).


At this time, I have within myself a great trust [in God], because I know – all of us know – that the Gospel’s word of truth is the strength of the Church: it is her life.
 The Gospel purifies and renews: it bears fruit wherever the community of believers hears and welcomes the grace of God in truth and lives in charity.
 This is my faith, this is my joy.


When, almost eight years ago, on April 19th, [2005], I agreed to take on the Petrine ministry, I held steadfast in this certainty, which has always accompanied me.
 In that moment, as I have already stated several times, the words that resounded in my heart were: “Lord, what do you ask of me?
 It a great weight that You place on my shoulders, but, if You ask me, at your word I will throw out the nets, sure that you will guide me” – and the Lord really has guided me.
 He has been close to me: daily could I feel His presence.
 [These years] have been a stretch of the Church’s pilgrim way, which has seen moments joy and light, but also difficult moments.
 I have felt like St.
 Peter with the Apostles in the boat on the Sea of Galilee: the Lord has given us many days of sunshine and gentle breeze, days in which the catch has been abundant; [then] there have been times when the seas were rough and the wind against us, as in the whole history of the Church it has ever been - and the Lord seemed to sleep.
 Nevertheless, I always knew that the Lord is in the barque, that the barque of the Church is not mine, not ours, but His - and He shall not let her sink.
 It is He, who steers her: to be sure, he does so also through men of His choosing, for He desired that it be so.
 This was and is a certainty that nothing can tarnish.
 It is for this reason, that today my heart is filled with gratitude to God, for never did He leave me or the Church without His consolation, His light, His love.


We are in the Year of Faith, which I desired in order to strengthen our own faith in God in a context that seems to push faith more and more toward the margins of life.
 I would like to invite everyone to renew firm trust in the Lord.
 I would like that we all, entrust ourselves as children to the arms of God, and rest assured that those arms support us and us to walk every day, even in times of struggle.
 I would like everyone to feel loved by the God who gave His Son for us and showed us His boundless love.
 I want everyone to feel the joy of being Christian.
 In a beautiful prayer to be recited daily in the morning says, “I adore you, my God, I love you with all my heart.
 I thank You for having created me, for having made me a Christian.
” Yes, we are happy for the gift of faith: it is the most precious good, that no one can take from us!
 Let us thank God for this every day, with prayer and with a coherent Christian life.
 God loves us, but He also expects that we love Him!


At this time, however, it is not only God, whom I desire to thank.
 A Pope is not alone in guiding St.
 Peter’s barque, even if it is his first responsibility – and I have not ever felt myself alone in bearing either the joys or the weight of the Petrine ministry.
 The Lord has placed next to me many people, who, with generosity and love for God and the Church, have helped me and been close to me.
 First of all you, dear Brother Cardinals: your wisdom, your counsels, your friendship, were all precious to me.
 My collaborators, starting with my Secretary of State, who accompanied me faithfully over the years, the Secretariat of State and the whole Roman Curia, as well as all those who, in various areas, give their service to the Holy See: the many faces which never emerge, but remain in the background, in silence, in their daily commitment, with a spirit of faith and humility.
 They have been for me a sure and reliable support.
 A special thought [goes] to the Church of Rome, my diocese!
 I can not forget the Brothers in the Episcopate and in the Priesthood, the consecrated persons and the entire People of God: in pastoral visits, in public encounters, at Audiences, in traveling, I have always received great care and deep affection; I also loved each and every one, without exception, with that pastoral charity which is the heart of every shepherd, especially the Bishop of Rome, the Successor of the Apostle Peter.
 Every day I carried each of you in my prayers, with the father's heart.


I wish my greetings and my thanks to reach everyone: the heart of a Pope expands to [embrace] the whole world.
 I would like to express my gratitude to the Diplomatic Corps accredited to the Holy See, which makes present the great family of nations.
 Here I also think of all those who work for good communication, whom I thank for their important service.


At this point I would like to offer heartfelt thanks to all the many people throughout the whole world, who, in recent weeks have sent me moving tokens of concern, friendship and prayer.
 Yes, the Pope is never alone: now I experience this [truth] again in a way so great as to touch my very heart.
 The Pope belongs to everyone, and so many people feel very close to him.
 It’s true that I receive letters from the world's greatest figures - from the Heads of State, religious leaders, representatives of the world of culture and so on.
 I also receive many letters from ordinary people who write to me simply from their heart and let me feel their affection, which is born of our being together in Christ Jesus, in the Church.
 These people do not write me as one might write, for example, to a prince or a great figure one does not know.
 They write as brothers and sisters, sons and daughters, with the sense of very affectionate family ties.
 Here, one can touch what the Church is – not an organization, not an association for religious or humanitarian purposes, but a living body, a community of brothers and sisters in the Body of Jesus Christ, who unites us all.
 To experience the Church in this way and almost be able to touch with one’s hands the power of His truth and His love, is a source of joy, in a time in which many speak of its decline.


In recent months, I felt that my strength had decreased, and I asked God with insistence in prayer to enlighten me with His light to make me take the right decision – not for my sake, but for the good of the Church.
 I have taken this step in full awareness of its severity and also its novelty, but with a deep peace of mind.
 Loving the Church also means having the courage to make difficult, trying choices, having ever before oneself the good of the Church and not one’s own.


Here allow me to return once again to April 19, 2005.
 The gravity of the decision was precisely in the fact that from that moment on I was committed always and forever by the Lord.
 Always – he, who assumes the Petrine ministry no longer has any privacy.
 He belongs always and totally to everyone, to the whole Church.
 His life is, so to speak, totally deprived of the private sphere.
 I have felt, and I feel even in this very moment, that one receives one’s life precisely when he offers it as a gift.
 I said before that many people who love the Lord also love the Successor of Saint Peter and are fond of him, that the Pope has truly brothers and sisters, sons and daughters all over the world, and that he feels safe in the embrace of their communion, because he no longer belongs to himself, but he belongs to all and all are truly his own.


The “always” is also a “forever” - there is no returning to private life.
 My decision to forgo the exercise of active ministry, does not revoke this.
 I do not return to private life, to a life of travel, meetings, receptions, conferences and so on.
 I do not abandon the cross, but remain in a new way near to the Crucified Lord.
 I no longer wield the power of the office for the government of the Church, but in the service of prayer I remain, so to speak, within St.
 Peter’s bounds.
 St.
 Benedict, whose name I bear as Pope, shall be a great example in this for me.
 He showed us the way to a life which, active or passive, belongs wholly to the work of God.


I thank each and every one of you for the respect and understanding with which you have welcomed this important decision.
 I continue to accompany the Church on her way through prayer and reflection, with the dedication to the Lord and to His Bride, which I have hitherto tried to live daily and that I would live forever.
 I ask you to remember me before God, and above all to pray for the Cardinals, who are called to so important a task, and for the new Successor of Peter, that the Lord might accompany him with the light and the power of His Spirit.


Let us invoke the maternal intercession of Mary, Mother of God and of the Church, that she might accompany each of us and the whole ecclesial community: to her we entrust ourselves, with deep trust.


Dear friends!
 God guides His Church, maintains her always, and especially in difficult times.
 Let us never lose this vision of faith, which is the only true vision of the way of the Church and the world.
 In our heart, in the heart of each of you, let there be always the joyous certainty that the Lord is near, that He does not abandon us, that He is near to us and that He surrounds us with His love.
 Thank you!

Dear Brothers, I have convoked you to this Consistory, not only for the three canonizations, but also to communicate to you a decision of great importance for the life of the Church.
 After having repeatedly examined my conscience before God, I have come to the certainty that my strengths, due to an advanced age, are no longer suited to an adequate exercise of the Petrine ministry.
 I am well aware that this ministry, due to its essential spiritual nature, must be carried out not only with words and deeds, but no less with prayer and suffering.
 However, in today’s world, subject to so many rapid changes and shaken by questions of deep relevance for the life of faith, in order to govern the bark of Saint Peter and proclaim the Gospel, both strength of mind and body are necessary, strength which in the last few months, has deteriorated in me to the extent that I have had to recognize my incapacity to adequately fulfill the ministry entrusted to me.
 For this reason, and well aware of the seriousness of this act, with full freedom I declare that I renounce the ministry of Bishop of Rome, Successor of Saint Peter, entrusted to me by the Cardinals on 19 April 2005, in such a way, that as from 28 February 2013, at 20:00 hours, the See of Rome, the See of Saint Peter, will be vacant and a Conclave to elect the new Supreme Pontiff will have to be convoked by those whose competence it is.


Dear Brothers, I thank you most sincerely for all the love and work with which you have supported me in my ministry and I ask pardon for all my defects.
 And now, let us entrust the Holy Church to the care of Our Supreme Pastor, Our Lord Jesus Christ, and implore his holy Mother Mary, so that she may assist the Cardinal Fathers with her maternal solicitude, in electing a new Supreme Pontiff.
 With regard to myself, I wish to also devotedly serve the Holy Church of God in the future through a life dedicated to prayer.

I offer a warm and affectionate greeting to the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors who have joined me for this, my last General Audience
Like Saint Paul, whose words we heard earlier, my heart is filled with thanksgiving to God who ever watches over his Church and her growth in faith and love, and I embrace all of you with joy and gratitude
During this Year of Faith, we have been called to renew our joyful trust in the Lord’s presence in our lives and in the life of the Church.
 I am personally grateful for his unfailing love and guidance in the eight years since I accepted his call to serve as the Successor of Peter
I am also deeply grateful for the understanding, support and prayers of so many of you, not only here in Rome, but also throughout the world.
 The decision I have made, after much prayer, is the fruit of a serene trust in God’s will and a deep love of Christ’s Church
I will continue to accompany the Church with my prayers, and I ask each of you to pray for me and for the new Pope
In union with Mary and all the saints, let us entrust ourselves in faith and hope to God, who continues to watch over our lives and to guide the journey of the Church and our world along the paths of history
I commend all of you, with great affection, to his loving care, asking Him to strengthen you in the hope which opens our hearts to the fullness of life that he alone can give
To you and your families, I impart my blessing
Thank you
Like the Apostle Paul in the Biblical text that we have heard, I feel in my heart that I have to especially thank God who guides and builds up the Church, who plants His Word and thus nourishes the faith in His People.
 At this moment my heart expands and embraces the whole Church throughout the world and I thank God for the 'news' that, in these years of my Petrine ministry, I have received about the faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and for the love that truly circulates in the Body of the Church, making it to live in the love and the hope that opens us to and guides us towards the fullness of life, towards our heavenly homeland.


I feel that I am carrying everyone with me in prayer in this God-given moment when I am collecting every meeting, every trip, every pastoral visit.
 I am gathering everyone and everything in prayer to entrust it to the Lord: so that we may be filled with the knowledge of His will through all spiritual wisdom and understanding in order to live in a manner worthy of the Lord and His love, bearing fruit in every good work (cf.
 Col 1:9-10).


At this moment I have great confidence because I know, we all know, that the Gospel's Word of truth is the strength of the Church; it is her life.
 The Gospel purifies and renews, bearing fruit, wherever the community of believers hears it and welcomes God's grace in truth and in love.
 This is my confidence, this is my joy.


When, on 19 April almost eight years ago I accepted to take on the Petrine ministry, I had the firm certainty that has always accompanied me: this certainty for the life of the Church from the Word of God.
 At that moment, as I have already expressed many times, the words that resounded in my heart were: Lord, what do You ask of me?
 It is a great weight that You are placing on my shoulders but, if You ask it of me, I will cast my nets at your command, confident that You will guide me, even with all my weaknesses.
 And eight years later I can say that the Lord has guided me.
 He has been close to me.
 I have felt His presence every day.
 It has been a stretch of the Church's path that has had moments of joy and light, but also difficult moments.
 I felt like St.
 Peter and the Apostles in the boat on the See of Galilee.
 The Lord has given us many days of sunshine and light breezes, days when the fishing was plentiful, but also times when the water was rough and the winds against us, just as throughout the whole history of the Church, when the Lord seemed to be sleeping.
 But I always knew that the Lord is in that boat and I always knew that the boat of the Church is not mine, not ours, but is His.
 And the Lord will not let it sink.
 He is the one who steers her, of course also through those He has chosen because that is how He wanted it.
 This was and is a certainty that nothing can tarnish.
 And that is why my heart today is filled with gratitude to God, because He never left—the whole Church or me—without His consolation, His light, or His love.


We are in the Year of Faith, which I desired precisely in order to strengthen our faith in God in a context that seems to relegate it more and more to the background.
 I would like to invite everyone to renew their firm trust in the Lord, to entrust ourselves like children to God's arms, certain that those arms always hold us up and are what allow us to walk forward each day, even when it is a struggle.
 I would like everyone to feel beloved of that God who gave His Son for us and who has shown us His boundless love.
 I would like everyone to feel the joy of being Christian.
 In a beautiful prayer, which can be recited every morning, say: 'I adore you, my God and I love you with all my heart.
 Thank you for having created me, for having made me Christian.
.
.
' Yes, we are happy for the gift of faith.
 It is the most precious thing, which no one can take from us!
 Let us thank the Lord for this every day, with prayer and with a coherent Christian life.
 God loves us, but awaits us to also love Him!


It is not only God who I wish to thank at this time.
 A pope is not alone in guiding Peter's barque, even if it is his primary responsibility.
 I have never felt alone in bearing the joy and the weight of the Petrine ministry.
 The Lord has placed at my side so many people who, with generosity and love for God and the Church, have helped me and been close to me.
 First of all, you, dear Brother Cardinals: your wisdom, your advice, and your friendship have been precious to me.
 My collaborators, starting with my secretary of state who has accompanied me faithfully over the years; the Secretariat of State and the whole of the Roman Curia, as well as all those who, in their various areas, serve the Holy See.
 There are many faces that are never seen, remaining in obscurity, but precisely in their silence, in their daily dedication in a spirit of faith and humility, they were a sure and reliable support to me.
 A special thought goes to the Church of Rome, my diocese!
 I cannot forget my Brothers in the episcopate and in the priesthood, consecrated persons, and the entire People of God.
 In my pastoral visits, meetings, audiences, and trips I always felt great care and deep affection, but I have also loved each and every one of you, without exception, with that pastoral love that is the heart of every pastor, especially the Bishop of Rome, the Successor of the Apostle Peter.
 Every day I held each of you in prayer, with a father's heart.


I wish to send my greetings and my thanks to all: a pope's heart extends to the whole world.
 And I would like to express my gratitude to the Diplomatic Corps accredited to the Holy See, which makes the great family of Nations present here.
 Here I am also thinking of all those who work for good communication and I thank them for their important service.


At this point I would also like to wholeheartedly thank all of the many people around the world who, in recent weeks, have sent me touching tokens of concern, friendship, and prayer.
 Yes, the Pope is never alone.
 I feel this again now in such a great way that it touches my heart.
 The Pope belongs to everyone and many people feel very close to him.
 It's true that I receive letters from the world's notables—from heads of states, from religious leaders, from representatives of the world of culture, etc.
 But I also receive many letters from ordinary people who write to me simply from their hearts and make me feel their affection, which is born of our being together with Christ Jesus, in the Church.
 These people do not write to me the way one would write, for example, to a prince or a dignitary that they don't know.
 They write to me as brothers and sisters or as sons and daughters, with the sense of a very affectionate family tie.
 In this you can touch what the Church is—not an organization, not an association for religious or humanitarian ends, but a living body, a communion of brothers and sisters in the Body of Jesus Christ who unites us all.
 Experiencing the Church in this way and being able to almost touch with our hands the strength of His truth and His love is a reason for joy at a time when many are speaking of its decline.
 See how the Church is alive today!


In these last months I have felt that my strength had diminished and I asked God earnestly in prayer to enlighten me with His light to make me make the right decision, not for my own good, but for the good of the Church.
 I have taken this step in full awareness of its seriousness and also its newness, but with a profound peace of mind.
 Loving the Church also means having the courage to make difficult, agonized choices, always keeping in mind the good of the Church, not of oneself.


Allow me here to return once again to 19 April, 2005.
 The gravity of the decision lay precisely in the fact that, from that moment on, I was always and for always engaged by the Lord.
 Always—whoever assumes the Petrine ministry no longer has any privacy.
 He belongs always and entirely to everyone, to the whole Church.
 His life, so to speak, is totally deprived of its private dimension.
 I experienced, and I am experiencing it precisely now, that one receives life precisely when they give it.
 Before I said that many people who love the Lord also love St.
 Peter's Successor and are fond of him; that the Pope truly has brothers and sisters, sons and daughters all over the world and that he feels safe in the embrace of their communion; because he no longer belongs to himself but he belongs to all and all belong to him.


'Always' is also 'forever'--there is no return to private life.
 My decision to renounce the active exercise of the ministry does not revoke this.
 I am not returning to private life, to a life of trips, meetings, receptions, conferences, etc.
 I am not abandoning the cross, but am remaining beside the Crucified Lord in a new way.
 I no longer bear the power of the office for the governance of the Church, but I remain in the service of prayer, within St.
 Peter's paddock, so to speak.
 St.
 Benedict, whose name I bear as Pope, will be a great example to me in this.
 He has shown us the way for a life that, active or passive, belongs wholly to God's work.


I also thank each and every one of you for the respect and understanding with which you have received this important decision.
 I will continue to accompany the Church's journey through prayer and reflection, with the dedication to the Lord and His Bride that I have tried to live every day up to now and that I want to always live.
 I ask you to remember me to God, and above all to pray for the Cardinals who are called to such an important task, and for the new Successor of the Apostle Peter.
 Many the Lord accompany him with the light and strength of His Spirit.


We call upon the maternal intercession of Mary, the Mother of God and of the Church, that she might accompany each of us and the entire ecclesial community.
 We entrust ourselves to her with deep confidence.


Dear friends!
 God guides His Church, always sustaining her even and especially in difficult times.
 Let us never lose this vision of faith, which is the only true vision of the path of the Church and of the world.
 In our hearts, in the heart of each one of you, may there always be the joyous certainty that the Lord is beside us, that He does not abandon us, that He is near and embraces us with His love.
 Thank you.

Thank you, friends!
 I am honored by your invitation to talk to you.
 I want to take this
opportunity first to say “thank you” for what you do — for all your service to the
Church and your witness to our society.

It’s hard to believe that it’s been 20 years since Evangelium Vitae, the magna carta of
the modern pro-life movement.
 But St.
 John Paul II’s words still ring true: “The Gospel
of life is at the heart of Jesus’ message.
”i
When I became Archbishop of Los Angeles a few years ago, I expanded the portfolio of
the Archdiocese’s Justice and Peace Office — so that it is now the Office of Life,
Justice and Peace.

I did that because I believe the Gospel of life is not only the heart of the Gospel — it’s
also the heart of the Church’s social witness.

Everything we do.
 All the Church’s works of mercy and charity.
 All our advocacy for
the unborn and the elderly, the poor, the immigrant, the worker, the prisoner and the
sick.

Everything we do is rooted in the truth of the Gospel.
 The beautiful truth that every
human life matters — because every human life is sacred and created by the loving plan
of God.

So for me, and I know for my brother bishops, the pro-life ministry is vital to the
Church’s mission.

So thank you for your work and witness to the Gospel of life!

As many of you know, by the grace of God we had a pro-life victory recently in
California.
 Earlier this month, the State legislature decided to withdraw a bill that would
have legalized assisted suicide.

It’s a temporary victory, for sure.
 We expect to see the measure come back in January
or later next year in a ballot proposition.
 But for now it is stopped.

It is no secret that there was big money and powerful interests behind this legislation,
and nobody thought we could win.

But that what’s encouraging to me.
 Despite the odds and all the political pressure, we
were still able to engage legislators on this complicated issue and help them to see our
concerns.

The Church, of course, was not alone.
 We were part of a broad, diverse coalition that
included doctors and health care professionals, persons with disabilities, advocates for
the poor, leaders in our African American and immigrant communities, and others.

Working together, I think we made a persuasive case — that assisted suicide would
have dangerous implications for the poor and those who don’t have adequate access to
health care.

So I think that our success is a hopeful sign for the future.
 And that’s what I want to talk
about this afternoon.

In the United States, we are a long way from the “new culture of life” that St.
 John Paul
called us to build.
ii I think we are all aware of that — probably more and more every
day.

But that’s our challenge.
 It’s not only to save and protect the lives of the weak and
defenseless.
 That’s absolutely urgent.

We have to fight every day for the rights and dignity of every human life.
 Every life, at
every stage and in every condition.
 From the moment life is conceived in the womb,
until the moment life reaches its natural end in death.

But as we do that, we face a deeper challenge — that is spiritual, moral and cultural.
 In
fact, I would say this is one of the great challenges of the new evangelization in our
country.
 And that is the task of transforming this culture — turning it from the darkness
of death to the light of life.

We are living in a culture that is deeply confused and conflicted about the meaning of
creation and the meaning of human life.

And so we find ourselves more and more indifferent to the cruelty and injustice that we
see all around us.

This includes grave crimes against human life — widespread abortion at every stage,
even in the final hours of a pregnancy; experimentation with human embryos; the
“quiet” euthanasia of the old and sick.

But we can also talk about the injustice of racial discrimination; unemployment and
homelessness; the pollution of our environment — especially in poor and minority
communities.

We can talk about the violence in our neighborhoods; the epidemic of drugs; the crisis
of hope among our young people.
 The scandalous conditions in our prisons; the death
penalty.

One issue that we deal with every day in Los Angeles — the heart-breaking
deportations of fathers and mothers; whole families, including young children, being
held in immigration jails; people dying in the deserts outside our borders — all because
of our broken immigration system and our failure to fix it.

I am not trying to say that all of these issues are “equal.
” They are not.
 And we always
need to be clear about that.

The fundamental injustice in our society is the killing of innocent unborn life through
abortion and the killing of the sick and defenseless through euthanasia and assisted
suicide.

Abortion and euthanasia raise basic questions of human rights and social justice in our
society.
 Questions of what kind of society we are and what kind of people we want to
be.

So the Church must proclaim, in every time and place — that the right to life is the
foundation of every other right and the true foundation of justice and peace in society.

If the child in the womb has no right to be born, if the sick and the old have no right to
be taken care of — then there is no solid foundation to defend anyone’s human rights.

But my friends, we need to acknowledge that the evils of abortion and euthanasia exist
in a wider, cultural context.

We need to recognize that we are living in a culture that has become totally secularized
and de-Christianized.

In my opinion, this is the great test for the Church in the 21st century.
 How do we live
and love and work and create; how do we raise our families and carry out our Christian
mission — in a culture that has no need for God and has no tolerance for people who believe in God?
 A culture that is more and more hostile to the Church and her teachings
and institutions.

This is the test for us.
 And we are living in a culture that has taken on a “godless”
shape.
 And what we see throughout our culture — all the cruelty, the injustice and
indifference — all of it is rooted in our society’s abandonment of God.

Because without God we become strangers to ourselves.
 Without God we don’t know
who we are, or where we come from, or what we are here for.

That’s the issue at a personal, individual level.
 At the level of society, a society that no
longer believes in a Creator loses the meaning of creation, loses the reason for human
solidarity and community.

In a society without God, the human person becomes “nothing special,” nothing sacred.

The value of a human life is judged according to whether it is “productive” or
“efficient.
”
We see this utilitarian mentality at work everywhere in our society — especially in our
cultural debates about euthanasia, abortion, embryo research, and contraception.

There is a growing assumption in our society that some lives do not matter as much as
others — that some lives are not worth society’s “investment,” not worth paying for or
protecting.

We also see that some lives are judged to be “disposable” precisely because they are no
longer “useful” — because they are too old, too sick, or too weak.
 Lives that cause
inconvenience or become a burden to others — can be ignored or eliminated.

My friends, it’s not enough for us to criticize the cruelty of this culture.
 It’s not enough
for us to decry a “culture of death.
”
Our challenge as Christians is to change and convert this culture!

We have to call our society once more to rediscover the sanctity, the dignity and the
transcendent destiny of the human person, who is created in the image of the Creator.

We need to show our neighbors — by our words and by our actions — that every
human life is sacred and precious, because every human life is created out of love by
God, who calls us to a personal relationship, to the vocation of being God’s children.

The Servant of God Dorothy Day, the great apostle to America, tells the story about
how one day she was walking down the streets of New York City praying her Rosary.

She was on her way to a meeting of some union workers who were on strike.

And this is what happened, she said:
“As I waited for the traffic light to change … suddenly like a bright light, like a joyful
thought, the words ‘Our Father’ pierced my heart.
 To all those who were about me, to
all the passersby, to the longshoremen idling about the corner, black and white, to the
striking seamen I was going to see, I was akin.
 For we were all children of a common
Father, all creatures of one Creator.
 And Catholic or Protestant, Jew or Christian,
Communist or non-Communist, were bound together by this tie.

“We cannot escape the recognition of the fact that we are all brothers.
 Whether or not a
man believes in Jesus Christ, his incarnation, his life here with us, his crucifixion and
resurrection; whether or not a man believes in God, the fact remains that we are all the
children of one Father.
”iii
My friends, in these words, we have a beautiful summary of the Gospel of life, which is
the beautiful truth of God’s plan for creation and for every life.

As you know, my brother bishops and I in the United States are promoting Dorothy
Day’s cause for canonization.

And I believe she is a powerful witness to the Gospel of life.
 She shows us a way to live
in this culture that denies God, and a way to confront the injustice and poverty and
violence that we find in this culture.

Dorothy Day knew personally the tragedy of abortion and also the despair that leads
people to try suicide.
 But she also discovered the power of God’s tender mercies —
which can heal every wound and bring new life out of sin and death.

In our mission of the new evangelization, we need to learn from Dorothy Day’s
profound critique of our society and culture.

She called us to examine our conscience.
 She asked what does Christ’s command to
love our neighbor mean, when we are living in comfort and our neighbor does not have
what he needs to live?
iv
She called us to overturn the false idols in our lives and in our society — the idols of the
flesh and the idols of the marketplace; the idols of individualism, nationalism, and
racism.

She did not speak much publicly about abortion.
 But when she did, she wrote with
empathy and compassion for the pain of the women who were caught up in it.

In her tender approach, she gives us a model for our own preaching and ministry —
teaching us how to speak on this delicate issue in a way that brings forgiveness,
reconciliation and healing.

But Dorothy Day also reminded us that as a public policy — abortion and birth control
are “social sins” — crimes against creation and our common humanity.
 She believed
that “birth control and abortion are genocide” against the poor and minority peoples.

These are strong words.
 But they have credibility because of her own experience with
abortion and her lifetime spent at society’s margins, serving the poorest of the poor.

Dorothy Day also gave us a beautiful line that should become our pro-life motto: “Make
room for children, don’t do away with them.
”v
My friends, Dorothy Day reminds us always that the Gospel of life must be proclaimed
in words of love and works of mercy.

And as she did, we also have to find ways to make connections, to build bridges and
friendships with others in our community.
 The purpose, of course, is to foster a spirit of
compassion and caring and to bring people together in the cause of life and human
dignity.

We have been trying to do that in various ways in Los Angeles.

One example: This year, held our first annual “march for life” to mark the Roe v.
 Wade
decision — it’s the first time this has been done in Los Angeles.
 We called the event
OneLifeLA.

It was a joy-filled, beautiful family-centered picnic and celebration, with more than
15,000 people.
 We marched through the streets of downtown L.
A.
 — beginning at
L.
A.
’s first church, which dates back to the mission era, and we ended up in the park
outside City Hall where we held a day-long program.

We designed a program filled with inspiring testimonies drawn from a wide variety of
individuals and groups working in our community to build a culture of life.
 Stories of
hope and courage; stories of love and self-sacrifice.

And the message was clear — that God’s love embraces every life, and especially those
lives that are vulnerable and weak, those who cannot care for themselves.

My friends, let me conclude these reflections by looking ahead to the visit of Pope
Francis to the United States in September.

The Pope’s visit is going to be special for those of us from California, and also for
Hispanic Catholics throughout the hemisphere.
 Because the Pope is going to be
canonizing Blessed Junípero Serra, the great Franciscan missionary who is the founder
of California and one of the spiritual founders of America.

t’s kind of awesome to think about it — Father Junipero Serra will be the first
American saint canonized on American soil.
 He is also the first Hispanic saint from this
country.
 And he will be canonized by the first Pope from the New World.

And in my prayer and preparation for the Pope’s visit, I have been reading and
reflecting a lot on the words and witness of Father Junipero.

And it strikes me that at the dawn of the first evangelization of our country, we find in
Father Junípero and his fellow missionaries — a passionate commitment to human life
and human dignity.

In his writings, we find deep love for the Native peoples he had come to evangelize.
 We
find beautiful writing on the environment and the natural world, and important
reflections on social justice and human rights.

Father Junípero was a defender and protector of the Native peoples, and especially
women — who were subject to systematic violence at the hands of the Spanish military.

At a time when many still denied the “humanity” of the Native peoples, Father Junípero
drew up a “bill of rights” that was a radical call for justice and the promotion of integral
human development.

Father Junípero is also important in the history of the Gospel of life.
 Because I believe
he was the first person in the Americas — and maybe in all of the universal Church —
to make a theological and moral argument against the death penalty.

It’s a great story, and I will leave you with it.

It goes like this: In 1775, the Natives attacked the San Diego Mission.
 They burned the
whole place down and they tortured and killed one of the Franciscans there, a good
friend of Fray Junípero.

Of course, the military wanted to arrest the Natives and execute them.

But Father Junípero wrote repeated letters urging the authorities to spare the killers,
even though they were guilty of the crime.
 In his appeals, he said some truly remarkable
things about human dignity, human rights and the mercy of God.

Let me leave you with one quote: “Let the murderer live so he can be saved, which is
the purpose of our coming here and the reason for forgiving him.
”vi
My friends, this is our “purpose” too in the new evangelization.
 We are called to follow
in the path of the missionaries and saints of the Americas and to proclaim the Gospel of
life, which is the heart of message of Jesus.
 This is the beautiful challenge, the beautify duty we have.
 We are called to save lives and to spread God’s mercy and forgiveness,
his healing and peace.

So let us to continue in our mission — to build the new culture of life in our times.
 Let
us work to open people’s eyes to the beauty of creation, to the beauty of every human
life, and to the source of all life in the love of our Creator.

And may Our Lady of Guadalupe, Mother of the Americas and Mother of Life, watch
over all of us in her tender love!

LA STAMPA: What does Christmas say to people today?

POPE FRANCIS: Christmas is God’s meeting with his people.
 It is also a consolation, a mystery of consolation.
 It speaks of tenderness and hope.
 When God meets us he tells us two things.
 The first thing he says is: have hope.
 God always opens doors, he never closes them.
 He is the father who opens doors for us.
 The second thing he says is: don’t be afraid of tenderness.
 When Christians forget about hope and tenderness they become a cold Church, that loses its sense of direction and is held back by ideologies and worldly attitudes, whereas God’s simplicity tells you: go forward, I am a Father who caresses you.
 Throughout my life as a priest, going to the parish, I have always sought to transmit this tenderness, particularly to children and the elderly.
 It does me good and it makes me think of the tenderness God has towards us.
”

Christmas is often presented as a sugar-coated fairy tale.
 But God is born into a world where there is also a great deal of suffering and misery.

The message announced to us in the Gospels is a message of joy.
 The evangelists described a joyful event to us.
 They do not discuss about the unjust world and how God could be born into such a world.
 All this is the fruit of our own contemplations: the poor, the child that is born into a precarious situation.
 The (first) Christmas was not a condemnation of social injustice and poverty; it was an announcement of joy.
 Everything else are conclusions that we draw.
 Some are correct, others are less so and others still are ideologized.
 Christmas is joy, religious joy, God’s joy, an inner joy of light and peace.
 When you are unable or in a human situation that does not allow you to comprehend this joy, then one experiences this feast with a worldly joyfulness.
 But there is a difference between profound joy and worldly joyfulness.


This is your first Christmas in a world marked by conflict and war.
.
.

God never gives someone a gift they are not capable of receiving.
 In a world afflicted by war, this Christmas makes me think of God’s patience.
 The Bible clearly shows that God’s main virtue is that He is love.
 He waits for us; he never tires of waiting for us.
 He gives us the gift and then waits for us.
 This happens in the life of each and every one of us.
 There are those who ignore him.
 But God is patient and the peace and serenity of Christmas Eve is a reflection of God’s patience toward us.


This coming January marks the 50th anniversary of Paul VI’s historic visit to the Holy Land.
 Will you go?

Christmas always makes us think of Bethlehem, and Bethlehem is a precise point in the Holy Land where Jesus lived.
 On Christmas night, I think above all with the Christians who live there, of those who are in difficulty, of the many people who have had to leave that land because of various problems.
 But Bethlehem is still Bethlehem.
 God arrived at a specific time in a specific land; that is where God’s tenderness and grace appeared.
 We cannot think of Christmas without thinking of the Holy land.
 Fifty years ago, Paul VI had the courage to go out and go there and this marked the beginning of the era of papal journeys.
 I would also like to go there, to meet my brother Bartholomew, the Patriarch of Constantinople, and commemorate this 50th anniversary with him, renewing that embrace which took place between Pope Montini and Athenagoras in Jerusalem, in 1964.
 We are preparing for this.


You have met with seriously ill children on more than one occasion.
 What do you have to say about this innocent suffering?

One man who has been a life mentor for me is Dostoievski and his explicit and implicit question “Why do children suffer?
” has always stirred my heart.
 There is no explanation.
 This image comes to mind: at a particular point of his or her life, a child “wakes up,” doesn’t understand much and feels threatened, he or she starts asking their mom or dad questions.
 This is the “why” age.
 But when the child asks a question, he or she doesn’t wait to hear the full answer, they immediately start bombarding you with more “whys.
” What they are really looking for, more than an explanation, is a reassuring look on their parent’s face.
 When I come across a suffering child, the only prayer that comes to mind is the “why” prayer.
 Why Lord?
 He doesn’t explain anything to me.
 But I can feel Him looking at me.
 So I can say: You know why, I don’t, and You won’t tell me, but You’re looking at me and I trust You, Lord, I trust your gaze.


Speaking of children’s suffering, we can’t forget the tragedy of those who are suffering from hunger.

With all the food that is left over and thrown away we could feed so many.
 If we were able to stop wasting and start recycling food, world hunger would diminish greatly.
 I was struck by one statistic, which says ten thousand children die of hunger each day across the world.
 There are so many children that cry because they are hungry.
 At the Wednesday General Audience the other day there was a young mother behind one of the barriers with a baby that was just a few month's old.
 The child was crying its eyes out as I came past.
 The mother was caressing it.
 I said to her: madam, I think the child’s hungry.
 “Yes, it’s probably time…” she replied.
 “Please give it something to eat!
” I said.
 She was shy and didn’t want to breastfeed in public, while the Pope was passing.
 I wish to say the same to humanity: give people something to eat!
 That woman had milk to give to her child; we have enough food in the world to feed everyone.
 If we work with humanitarian organizations and are able to agree all together not to waste food, sending it instead to those who need it, we could do so much to help solve the problem of hunger in the world.


Some of the passages in the “Evangelii Gaudium” attracted the criticism of ultraconservatives in the US.
 As a Pope, what does it feel like to be called a “Marxist”?

The Marxist ideology is wrong.
 But I have met many Marxists in my life who are good people, so I don’t feel offended.


The most striking part of the Exhortation was where it refers to an economy that “kills.
"
There is nothing in the Exhortation that cannot be found in the social Doctrine of the Church.
 I wasn’t speaking from a technical point of view, what I was trying to do was to give a picture of what is going on.
 The only specific quote I used was the one regarding the “trickle-down theories” which assume that economic growth, encouraged by a free market, will inevitably succeed in bringing about greater justice and social inclusiveness in the world.
 The promise was that when the glass was full, it would overflow, benefitting the poor.
 But what happens instead, is that when the glass is full, it magically gets bigger, and nothing ever comes out for the poor.
 This was the only reference to a specific theory.
 I was not, I repeat, speaking from a technical point of view but according to the Church’s social doctrine.
 This does not mean being a Marxist.


Is Christian unity a priority for you?

Yes, for me ecumenism is a priority.
 Today there is an ecumenism of blood.
 In some countries they kill Christians for wearing a cross or having a Bible and before they kill them they do not ask them whether they are Anglican, Lutheran, Catholic or Orthodox.
 Their blood is mixed.
 To those who kill, we are Christians.
 We are united in blood, even though we have not yet managed to take necessary steps towards unity between us and perhaps the time has not yet come.
 Unity is a gift that we need to ask for.
 I knew a parish priest in Hamburg who was dealing with the beatification cause of a Catholic priest guillotined by the Nazis for teaching children the catechism.
 After him, in the list of condemned individuals, was a Lutheran pastor who was killed for the same reason.
 Their blood was mixed.
 The parish priest told me he had gone to the bishop and said to him: “I will continue to deal with the cause, but both of their causes, not just the Catholic priest’s.
” This is what ecumenism of blood is.
 It still exists today; you just need to read the newspapers.
 Those who kill Christians don’t ask for your identity card to see which Church you were baptized in.


In the Apostolic Exhortation you called for prudent and bold pastoral choices regarding the sacraments.
 What were you referring to?

When I speak of prudence I do not think of it in terms of an attitude that paralyzes but as the virtue of a leader.
 Prudence is a virtue of government.
 So is boldness.
 One must govern with boldness and prudence.
 I spoke about baptism and communion as spiritual food that helps one to go on; it is to be considered a remedy not a prize.
 Some immediately thought about the sacraments for remarried divorcees, but I did not refer to any specific cases; I simply wanted to point out a principle.
 We must try to facilitate people’s faith, rather than control it.
 Last year in Argentina I condemned the attitude of some priests who did not baptize the children of unmarried mothers.
 This is a sick mentality.


And what about remarried divorcees?

The exclusion of divorced people who contract a second marriage from communion is not a sanction.
 It is important to remember this.
 But I didn’t talk about this in the Exhortation.
 We will discuss marriage as a whole at the Consistory meetings in February.
 The issues will also be addressed at the Extraordinary Synod in October 2014 and again at the Ordinary Synod the following year.
 Many elements will be examined in more detail and clarified during these sessions.


What is the right relationship between the Church and politics?

The relationship needs to be parallel and convergent at the same time.
 Parallel because each of us has his or her own path to take, and his or her different tasks.
 Convergent only in helping others.
 When relationships converge first, without the people, or without taking the people into account, that is when the bond with political power is formed, leading the Church to rot: business, compromises… The relationship needs to proceed in a parallel way, each with its own method, tasks and vocation, converging only in the common good.
 Politics is noble; it is one of the highest forms of charity, as Paul VI used to say.
 We sully it when we mix it with business.
 The relationship between the Church and political power can also be corrupted if common good is not the only converging point.


May I ask you if the Church will have women cardinals in the future?

I don’t know where this idea sprang from.
 Women in the Church must be valued not “clericalised”.
 Whoever thinks of women as cardinals suffers a bit from clericalism.


Could you have imagined a year ago that you would be celebrating Christmas 2013 in St.
 Peter’s?

Absolutely not.


Were you expecting to be elected?

No I didn’t expect it.
 I never lost my peace as the number of votes increased.
 I remained calm.
 And that peace is still there, I consider it a gift from the Lord.
 When the final balloting was over, I was taken to the center of the Sistine Chapel and asked if I accepted.
 I said I did and that I had chosen the name Francis.
 Only then did I walk away.
 I was taken to the next room to change (my cassock).
 Then, just before I made my public appearance, I knelt down to pray for some minutes in the Pauline chapel along with Cardinals (Agostino) Vallini and (Claudio) Hummes.

The great danger in today’s world, pervaded as it is by consumerism, is the desolation and anguish born of a complacent yet covetous heart, the feverish pursuit of frivolous pleasures, and a blunted conscience.
 Whenever our interior life becomes caught up in its own interests and concerns, there is no longer room for others, no place for the poor.
 God’s voice is no longer heard, the quiet joy of his love is no longer felt, and the desire to do good fades.
 This is a very real danger for believers too.
 Many fall prey to it, and end up resentful, angry and listless.
 That is no way to live a dignified and fulfilled life; it is not God’s will for us, nor is it the life in the Spirit which has its source in the heart of the risen Christ.


Just as the commandment “Thou shalt not kill” sets a clear limit in order to safeguard the value of human life, today we also have to say “thou shalt not” to an economy of exclusion and inequality.
 Such an economy kills.
 How can it be that it is not a news item when an elderly homeless person dies of exposure, but it is news when the stock market loses two points?
 This is a case of exclusion.
 Can we continue to stand by when food is thrown away while people are starving?
 This is a case of inequality.
 Today everything comes under the laws of competition and the survival of the fittest, where the powerful feed upon the powerless.
 As a consequence, masses of people find themselves excluded and marginalized: without work, without possibilities, without any means of escape.


Human beings are themselves considered consumer goods to be used and then discarded.
 We have created a “disposable” culture which is now spreading.
 It is no longer simply about exploitation and oppression, but something new.
 Exclusion ultimately has to do with what it means to be a part of the society in which we live; those excluded are no longer society’s underside or its fringes or its disenfranchised – they are no longer even a part of it.
 The excluded are not the “exploited” but the outcast, the “leftovers”.


54.
 In this context, some people continue to defend trickle-down theories which assume that economic growth, encouraged by a free market, will inevitably succeed in bringing about greater justice and inclusiveness in the world.
 This opinion, which has never been confirmed by the facts, expresses a crude and naïve trust in the goodness of those wielding economic power and in the sacralized workings of the prevailing economic system.
 Meanwhile, the excluded are still waiting.
 To sustain a lifestyle which excludes others, or to sustain enthusiasm for that selfish ideal, a globalization of indifference has developed.
 Almost without being aware of it, we end up being incapable of feeling compassion at the outcry of the poor, weeping for other people’s pain, and feeling a need to help them, as though all this were someone else’s responsibility and not our own.
 The culture of prosperity deadens us; we are thrilled if the market offers us something new to purchase; and in the meantime all those lives stunted for lack of opportunity seem a mere spectacle; they fail to move us.


No to the new idolatry of money

55.
 One cause of this situation is found in our relationship with money, since we calmly accept its dominion over ourselves and our societies.
 The current financial crisis can make us overlook the fact that it originated in a profound human crisis: the denial of the primacy of the human person!
 We have created new idols.
 The worship of the ancient golden calf (cf.
 Ex 32:1-35) has returned in a new and ruthless guise in the idolatry of money and the dictatorship of an impersonal economy lacking a truly human purpose.
 The worldwide crisis affecting finance and the economy lays bare their imbalances and, above all, their lack of real concern for human beings; man is reduced to one of his needs alone: consumption.


56.
 While the earnings of a minority are growing exponentially, so too is the gap separating the majority from the prosperity enjoyed by those happy few.
 This imbalance is the result of ideologies which defend the absolute autonomy of the marketplace and financial speculation.
 Consequently, they reject the right of states, charged with vigilance for the common good, to exercise any form of control.
 A new tyranny is thus born, invisible and often virtual, which unilaterally and relentlessly imposes its own laws and rules.
 Debt and the accumulation of interest also make it difficult for countries to realize the potential of their own economies and keep citizens from enjoying their real purchasing power.
 To all this we can add widespread corruption and self-serving tax evasion, which have taken on worldwide dimensions.
 The thirst for power and possessions knows no limits.
 In this system, which tends to devour everything which stands in the way of increased profits, whatever is fragile, like the environment, is defenseless before the interests of a deified market, which become the only rule.


No to a financial system which rules rather than serves

57.
 Behind this attitude lurks a rejection of ethics and a rejection of God.
 Ethics has come to be viewed with a certain scornful derision.
 It is seen as counterproductive, too human, because it makes money and power relative.
 It is felt to be a threat, since it condemns the manipulation and debasement of the person.
 In effect, ethics leads to a God who calls for a committed response which is outside of the categories of the marketplace.
 When these latter are absolutized, God can only be seen as uncontrollable, unmanageable, even dangerous, since he calls human beings to their full realization and to freedom from all forms of enslavement.
 Ethics – a non-ideological ethics – would make it possible to bring about balance and a more humane social order.
 With this in mind, I encourage financial experts and political leaders to ponder the words of one of the sages of antiquity: “Not to share one’s wealth with the poor is to steal from them and to take away their livelihood.
 It is not our own goods which we hold, but theirs”.
[55]

58.
 A financial reform open to such ethical considerations would require a vigorous change of approach on the part of political leaders.
 I urge them to face this challenge with determination and an eye to the future, while not ignoring, of course, the specifics of each case.
 Money must serve, not rule!
 The Pope loves everyone, rich and poor alike, but he is obliged in the name of Christ to remind all that the rich must help, respect and promote the poor.
 I exhort you to generous solidarity and a return of economics and finance to an ethical approach which favours human beings.


No to the inequality which spawns violence

59.
 Today in many places we hear a call for greater security.
 But until exclusion and inequality in society and between peoples is reversed, it will be impossible to eliminate violence.
 The poor and the poorer peoples are accused of violence, yet without equal opportunities the different forms of aggression and conflict will find a fertile terrain for growth and eventually explode.
 When a society – whether local, national or global – is willing to leave a part of itself on the fringes, no political programmes or resources spent on law enforcement or surveillance systems can indefinitely guarantee tranquility.
 This is not the case simply because inequality provokes a violent reaction from those excluded from the system, but because the socioeconomic system is unjust at its root.
 Just as goodness tends to spread, the toleration of evil, which is injustice, tends to expand its baneful influence and quietly to undermine any political and social system, no matter how solid it may appear.
 If every action has its consequences, an evil embedded in the structures of a society has a constant potential for disintegration and death.
 It is evil crystallized in unjust social structures, which cannot be the basis of hope for a better future.
 We are far from the so-called “end of history”, since the conditions for a sustainable and peaceful development have not yet been adequately articulated and realized.


60.
 Today’s economic mechanisms promote inordinate consumption, yet it is evident that unbridled consumerism combined with inequality proves doubly damaging to the social fabric.
 Inequality eventually engenders a violence which recourse to arms cannot and never will be able to resolve.
 This serves only to offer false hopes to those clamouring for heightened security, even though nowadays we know that weapons and violence, rather than providing solutions, create new and more serious conflicts.
 Some simply content themselves with blaming the poor and the poorer countries themselves for their troubles; indulging in unwarranted generalizations, they claim that the solution is an “education” that would tranquilize them, making them tame and harmless.
 All this becomes even more exasperating for the marginalized in the light of the widespread and deeply rooted corruption found in many countries – in their governments, businesses and institutions – whatever the political ideology of their leaders.

“And God saw that it was good” (Gen 1:12, 18, 21, 25).
 The biblical account of the beginning of the history of the world and of humanity speaks to us of a God who looks at creation, in a sense contemplating it, and declares: “It is good”.
 This allows us to enter into God’s heart and, precisely from within him, to receive his message.
 We can ask ourselves: what does this message mean?
 What does it say to me, to you, to all of us?

It says to us simply that this, our world, in the heart and mind of God, is the “house of harmony and peace”, and that it is the space in which everyone is able to find their proper place and feel “at home”, because it is “good”.
 All of creation forms a harmonious and good unity, but above all humanity, made in the image and likeness of God, is one family, in which relationships are marked by a true fraternity not only in words: the other person is a brother or sister to love, and our relationship with God, who is love, fidelity and goodness, mirrors every human relationship and brings harmony to the whole of creation.
 God’s world is a world where everyone feels responsible for the other, for the good of the other.
 This evening, in reflection, fasting and prayer, each of us deep down should ask ourselves: Is this really the world that I desire?
 Is this really the world that we all carry in our hearts?
 Is the world that we want really a world of harmony and peace, in ourselves, in our relations with others, in families, in cities, in and between nations?
 And does not true freedom mean choosing ways in this world that lead to the good of all and are guided by love?

But then we wonder: Is this the world in which we are living?
 Creation retains its beauty which fills us with awe and it remains a good work.
 But there is also “violence, division, disagreement, war”.
 This occurs when man, the summit of creation, stops contemplating beauty and goodness, and withdraws into his own selfishness.

When man thinks only of himself, of his own interests and places himself in the centre, when he permits himself to be captivated by the idols of dominion and power, when he puts himself in God’s place, then all relationships are broken and everything is ruined; then the door opens to violence, indifference, and conflict.
 This is precisely what the passage in the Book of Genesis seeks to teach us in the story of the Fall: man enters into conflict with himself, he realizes that he is naked and he hides himself because he is afraid (cf.
 Gen 3: 10), he is afraid of God’s glance; he accuses the woman, she who is flesh of his flesh (cf.
 v.
 12); he breaks harmony with creation, he begins to raise his hand against his brother to kill him.
 Can we say that from harmony he passes to “disharmony”?
 No, there is no such thing as “disharmony”; there is either harmony or we fall into chaos, where there is violence, argument, conflict, fear ….

It is exactly in this chaos that God asks man’s conscience: “Where is Abel your brother?
” and Cain responds: “I do not know; am I my brother’s keeper?
” (Gen 4:9).
 We too are asked this question, it would be good for us to ask ourselves as well: Am I really my brother’s keeper?
 Yes, you are your brother’s keeper!
 To be human means to care for one another!
 But when harmony is broken, a metamorphosis occurs: the brother who is to be cared for and loved becomes an adversary to fight, to kill.
 What violence occurs at that moment, how many conflicts, how many wars have marked our history!
 We need only look at the suffering of so many brothers and sisters.
 This is not a question of coincidence, but the truth: we bring about the rebirth of Cain in every act of violence and in every war.
 All of us!
 And even today we continue this history of conflict between brothers, even today we raise our hands against our brother.
 Even today, we let ourselves be guided by idols, by selfishness, by our own interests, and this attitude persists.
 We have perfected our weapons, our conscience has fallen asleep, and we have sharpened our ideas to justify ourselves.
 As if it were normal, we continue to sow destruction, pain, death!
 Violence and war lead only to death, they speak of death!
 Violence and war are the language of death!

At this point I ask myself: Is it possible to change direction?
 Can we get out of this spiral of sorrow and death?
 Can we learn once again to walk and live in the ways of peace?
 Invoking the help of God, under the maternal gaze of the Salus Populi Romani, Queen of Peace, I say: Yes, it is possible for everyone!
 From every corner of the world tonight, I would like to hear us cry out: Yes, it is possible for everyone!
 Or even better, I would like for each one of us, from the least to the greatest, including those called to govern nations, to respond: Yes, we want it!
 My Christian faith urges me to look to the Cross.
 How I wish that all men and women of good will would look to the Cross if only for a moment!
 There, we can see God’s reply: violence is not answered with violence, death is not answered with the language of death.
 In the silence of the Cross, the uproar of weapons ceases and the language of reconciliation, forgiveness, dialogue, and peace is spoken.

This evening, I ask the Lord that we Christians, and our brothers and sisters of other religions, and every man and woman of good will, cry out forcefully: violence and war are never the way to peace!
 Let everyone be moved to look into the depths of his or her conscience and listen to that word which says: Leave behind the self-interest that hardens your heart, overcome the indifference that makes your heart insensitive towards others, conquer your deadly reasoning, and open yourself to dialogue and reconciliation.
 Look upon your brother’s sorrow and do not add to it, stay your hand, rebuild the harmony that has been shattered; and all this achieved not by conflict but by encounter!

May the noise of weapons cease!
 War always marks the failure of peace, it is always a defeat for humanity.
 Let the words of Pope Paul VI resound again: “No more one against the other, no more, never!
 … war never again, never again war!
” (Address to the United Nations, 1965).
 ”Peace expresses itself only in peace, a peace which is not separate from the demands of justice but which is fostered by personal sacrifice, clemency, mercy and love” (World Day of Peace Message, 1975).
 Forgiveness, dialogue, reconciliation – these are the words of peace, in beloved Syria, in the Middle East, in all the world!
 Let us pray for reconciliation and peace, let us work for reconciliation and peace, and let us all become, in every place, men and women of reconciliation and peace!
 Amen.


Father Spadaro: Who is Jorge Mario Bergoglio?


Pope Francis: I do not know what might be the most fitting description.
.
.
.
 I am a sinner.
 This is the most accurate definition.
 It is not a figure of speech, a literary genre.
 I am a sinner.


Yes, perhaps I can say that I am a bit astute, that I can adapt to circumstances, but it is also true that I am a bit naïve.
 Yes, but the best summary, the one that comes more from the inside and I feel most true is this: I am a sinner whom the Lord has looked upon.
 I am one who is looked upon by the Lord.
 I always felt my motto, Miserando atque Eligendo, was very true for me.


I think the Latin gerund miserando is impossible to translate in both Italian and Spanish.
 I like to translate it with another gerund that does not exist: misericordiando.


I do not know Rome well.
 I know a few things.
 These include the Basilica of St.
 Mary Major; I always used to go there.
 I know St.
 Mary Major, St.
 Peter’s.
.
.
but when I had to come to Rome, I always stayed in Via della Scrofa.
 From there I often visited the Church of St.
 Louis of France, and I went there to contemplate the painting of ‘The Calling of St.
 Matthew,’ by Caravaggio.


That finger of Jesus, pointing at Matthew.
 That’s me.
 I feel like him.
 Like Matthew.


It is the gesture of Matthew that strikes me: he holds on to his money as if to say, ‘No, not me!
 No, this money is mine.
’ Here, this is me, a sinner on whom the Lord has turned his gaze.
 And this is what I said when they asked me if I would accept my election as pontiff.


I am a sinner, but I trust in the infinite mercy and patience of our Lord Jesus Christ, and I accept in a spirit of penance.


Father Spadaro: Why Did You Become a Jesuit?
 Holy Father, what made you choose to enter the Society of Jesus?
 What struck you about the Jesuit order?


Pope Francis: I wanted something more.
 But I did not know what.
 I entered the diocesan seminary.
 I liked the Dominicans and I had Dominican friends.
 But then I chose the Society of Jesus, which I knew well because the seminary was entrusted to the Jesuits.
 Three things in particular struck me about the Society: the missionary spirit, community and discipline.
 And this is strange, because I am a really, really undisciplined person.
 But their discipline, the way they manage their time—these things struck me so much.


And then a thing that is really important for me: community.
 I was always looking for a community.
 I did not see myself as a priest on my own.
 I need a community.
 And you can tell this by the fact that I am here in Santa Marta.
 At the time of the conclave I lived in Room 207.
 (The rooms were assigned by drawing lots.
) This room where we are now was a guest room.
 I chose to live here, in Room 201, because when I took possession of the papal apartment, inside myself I distinctly heard a ‘no.
’ The papal apartment in the Apostolic Palace is not luxurious.
 It is old, tastefully decorated and large, but not luxurious.
 But in the end it is like an inverted funnel.
 It is big and spacious, but the entrance is really tight.
 People can come only in dribs and drabs, and I cannot live without people.
 I need to live my life with others.


Father Spadaro: What Does It Mean for a Jesuit to Be Bishop of Rome?
 How do you understand the role of service to the universal church that you have been called to play in the light of Ignatian spirituality?
 What does it mean for a Jesuit to be elected pope?
 What element of Ignatian spirituality helps you live your ministry?


Pope Francis: Discernment.
 Discernment is one of the things that worked inside St.
 Ignatius.
 For him it is an instrument of struggle in order to know the Lord and follow him more closely.
 I was always struck by a saying that describes the vision of Ignatius: non coerceri a maximo, sed contineri a minimo divinum est (“not to be limited by the greatest and yet to be contained in the tiniest—this is the divine”).
 I thought a lot about this phrase in connection with the issue of different roles in the government of the church, about becoming the superior of somebody else: it is important not to be restricted by a larger space, and it is important to be able to stay in restricted spaces.
 This virtue of the large and small is magnanimity.
 Thanks to magnanimity, we can always look at the horizon from the position where we are.
 That means being able to do the little things of every day with a big heart open to God and to others.
 That means being able to appreciate the small things inside large horizons, those of the kingdom of God.


This motto offers parameters to assume a correct position for discernment, in order to hear the things of God from God’s ‘point of view.
’ According to St.
 Ignatius, great principles must be embodied in the circumstances of place, time and people.
 In his own way, John XXIII adopted this attitude with regard to the government of the church, when he repeated the motto, ‘See everything; turn a blind eye to much; correct a little.
’ John XXIII saw all things, the maximum dimension, but he chose to correct a few, the minimum dimension.
 You can have large projects and implement them by means of a few of the smallest things.
 Or you can use weak means that are more effective than strong ones, as Paul also said in his First Letter to the Corinthians.


This discernment takes time.
 For example, many think that changes and reforms can take place in a short time.
 I believe that we always need time to lay the foundations for real, effective change.
 And this is the time of discernment.
 Sometimes discernment instead urges us to do precisely what you had at first thought you would do later.
 And that is what has happened to me in recent months.
 Discernment is always done in the presence of the Lord, looking at the signs, listening to the things that happen, the feeling of the people, especially the poor.
 My choices, including those related to the day-to-day aspects of life, like the use of a modest car, are related to a spiritual discernment that responds to a need that arises from looking at things, at people and from reading the signs of the times.
 Discernment in the Lord guides me in my way of governing.


But I am always wary of decisions made hastily.
 I am always wary of the first decision, that is, the first thing that comes to my mind if I have to make a decision.
 This is usually the wrong thing.
 I have to wait and assess, looking deep into myself, taking the necessary time.
 The wisdom of discernment redeems the necessary ambiguity of life and helps us find the most appropriate means, which do not always coincide with what looks great and strong.


How can the Society of Jesus be of service to the church today, what are its characteristics, but also the possible challenges facing the Society of Jesus?

The Society of Jesus is an institution in tension, always fundamentally in tension.
 A Jesuit is a person who is not centered in himself.
 The Society itself also looks to a center outside itself; its center is Christ and his church.
 So if the Society centers itself in Christ and the church, it has two fundamental points of reference for its balance and for being able to live on the margins, on the frontier.
 If it looks too much in upon itself, it puts itself at the center as a very solid, very well ‘armed’ structure, but then it runs the risk of feeling safe and self-sufficient.
 The Society must always have before itself the Deus semper maior, the always-greater God, and the pursuit of the ever greater glory of God, the church as true bride of Christ our Lord, Christ the king who conquers us and to whom we offer our whole person and all our hard work, even if we are clay pots, inadequate.
 This tension takes us out of ourselves continuously.
 The tool that makes the Society of Jesus not centered in itself, really strong, is, then, the account of conscience, which is at the same time paternal and fraternal, because it helps the Society to fulfill its mission better.


But it is difficult to speak of the Society.
 When you express too much, you run the risk of being misunderstood.
 The Society of Jesus can be described only in narrative form.
 Only in narrative form do you discern, not in a philosophical or theological explanation, which allows you rather to discuss.
 The style of the Society is not shaped by discussion, but by discernment, which of course presupposes discussion as part of the process.
 The mystical dimension of discernment never defines its edges and does not complete the thought.
 The Jesuit must be a person whose thought is incomplete, in the sense of open-ended thinking.
 There have been periods in the Society in which Jesuits have lived in an environment of closed and rigid thought, more instructive-ascetic than mystical: this distortion of Jesuit life gave birth to the Epitome Instituti.


No, the Jesuit always thinks, again and again, looking at the horizon toward which he must go, with Christ at the center.
 This is his real strength.
 And that pushes the Society to be searching, creative and generous.
 So now, more than ever, the Society of Jesus must be contemplative in action, must live a profound closeness to the whole church as both the ‘people of God’ and ‘holy mother the hierarchical church.
’ This requires much humility, sacrifice and courage, especially when you are misunderstood or you are the subject of misunderstandings and slanders, but that is the most fruitful attitude.
 Let us think of the tensions of the past history, in the previous centuries, about the Chinese rites controversy, the Malabar rites and the Reductions in Paraguay.


I am a witness myself to the misunderstandings and problems that the Society has recently experienced.
 Among those there were tough times, especially when it came to the issue of extending to all Jesuits the fourth vow of obedience to the pope.
 What gave me confidence at the time of Father Arrupe [superior general of the Jesuits from 1965 to 1983] was the fact that he was a man of prayer, a man who spent much time in prayer.
 I remember him when he prayed sitting on the ground in the Japanese style.
 For this he had the right attitude and made the right decisions.


Father Spadaro: Do you think that your past government experience can serve you in governing the universal church?


Pope Francis: In my experience as superior in the Society, to be honest, I have not always behaved in that way—that is, I did not always do the necessary consultation.
 And this was not a good thing.
 My style of government as a Jesuit at the beginning had many faults.
 That was a difficult time for the Society: an entire generation of Jesuits had disappeared.
 Because of this I found myself provincial when I was still very young.
 I was only 36 years old.
 That was crazy.
 I had to deal with difficult situations, and I made my decisions abruptly and by myself.
 Yes, but I must add one thing: when I entrust something to someone, I totally trust that person.
 He or she must make a really big mistake before I rebuke that person.
 But despite this, eventually people get tired of authoritarianism.


My authoritarian and quick manner of making decisions led me to have serious problems and to be accused of being ultraconservative.
 I lived a time of great interior crisis when I was in Cordova.
 To be sure, I have never been like Blessed Imelda [a goody-goody], but I have never been a right-winger.
 It was my authoritarian way of making decisions that created problems.


I say these things from life experience and because I want to make clear what the dangers are.
 Over time I learned many things.
 The Lord has allowed this growth in knowledge of government through my faults and my sins.
 So as Archbishop of Buenos Aires, I had a meeting with the six auxiliary bishops every two weeks, and several times a year with the council of priests.
 They asked questions and we opened the floor for discussion.
 This greatly helped me to make the best decisions.
 But now I hear some people tell me: ‘Do not consult too much, and decide by yourself.
’ Instead, I believe that consultation is very important.


The consistories, the synods are, for example, important places to make real and active this consultation.
 We must, however, give them a less rigid form.
 I do not want token consultations, but real consultations.
 The consultation group of eight cardinals, this ‘outsider’ advisory group, is not only my decision, but it is the result of the will of the cardinals, as it was expressed in the general congregations before the conclave.
 And I want to see that this is a real, not ceremonial consultation.


Father Spadaro: What does it mean exactly for you to “think with the church?
”

Pope Francis: The image of the church I like is that of the holy, faithful people of God.
 This is the definition I often use, and then there is that image from the Second Vatican Council’s ‘Dogmatic Constitution on the Church’ (No.
 12).
 Belonging to a people has a strong theological value.
 In the history of salvation, God has saved a people.
 There is no full identity without belonging to a people.
 No one is saved alone, as an isolated individual, but God attracts us looking at the complex web of relationships that take place in the human community.
 God enters into this dynamic, this participation in the web of human relationships.


The people itself constitutes a subject.
 And the church is the people of God on the journey through history, with joys and sorrows.
 Thinking with the church, therefore, is my way of being a part of this people.
 And all the faithful, considered as a whole, are infallible in matters of belief, and the people display this infallibilitas in credendo, this infallibility in believing, through a supernatural sense of the faith of all the people walking together.
 This is what I understand today as the ‘thinking with the church’ of which St.
 Ignatius speaks.
 When the dialogue among the people and the bishops and the pope goes down this road and is genuine, then it is assisted by the Holy Spirit.
 So this thinking with the church does not concern theologians only.


This is how it is with Mary: If you want to know who she is, you ask theologians; if you want to know how to love her, you have to ask the people.
 In turn, Mary loved Jesus with the heart of the people, as we read in the Magnificat.
 We should not even think, therefore, that ‘thinking with the church’ means only thinking with the hierarchy of the church.


And, of course, we must be very careful not to think that this infallibilitas of all the faithful I am talking about in the light of Vatican II is a form of populism.
 No; it is the experience of ‘holy mother the hierarchical church,’ as St.
 Ignatius called it, the church as the people of God, pastors and people together.
 The church is the totality of God’s people.


I see the sanctity of God’s people, this daily sanctity.
 There is a ‘holy middle class,’ which we can all be part of, the holiness Malègue wrote about.


I see the holiness in the patience of the people of God: a woman who is raising children, a man who works to bring home the bread, the sick, the elderly priests who have so many wounds but have a smile on their faces because they served the Lord, the sisters who work hard and live a hidden sanctity.
 This is for me the common sanctity.
 I often associate sanctity with patience: not only patience as hypomoné, taking charge of the events and circumstances of life, but also as a constancy in going forward, day by day.
 This is the sanctity of the militant church also mentioned by St.
 Ignatius.
 This was the sanctity of my parents: my dad, my mom, my grandmother Rosa who loved me so much.
 In my breviary I have the last will of my grandmother Rosa, and I read it often.
 For me it is like a prayer.
 She is a saint who has suffered so much, also spiritually, and yet always went forward with courage.


This church with which we should be thinking is the home of all, not a small chapel that can hold only a small group of selected people.
 We must not reduce the bosom of the universal church to a nest protecting our mediocrity.
 And the church is Mother; the church is fruitful.
 It must be.
 You see, when I perceive negative behavior in ministers of the church or in consecrated men or women, the first thing that comes to mind is: ‘Here’s an unfruitful bachelor’ or ‘Here’s a spinster.
’ They are neither fathers nor mothers, in the sense that they have not been able to give spiritual life.
 Instead, for example, when I read the life of the Salesian missionaries who went to Patagonia, I read a story of the fullness of life, of fruitfulness.


Another example from recent days that I saw got the attention of newspapers: the phone call I made to a young man who wrote me a letter.
 I called him because that letter was so beautiful, so simple.
 For me this was an act of generativity.
 I realized that he was a young man who is growing, that he saw in me a father, and that the letter tells something of his life to that father.
 The father cannot say, ‘I do not care.
’ This type of fruitfulness is so good for me.


Father Spadaro: What are your hopes for the universal church that come from these churches?


Pope Francis: The young Catholic churches, as they grow, develop a synthesis of faith, culture and life, and so it is a synthesis different from the one developed by the ancient churches.
 For me, the relationship between the ancient Catholic churches and the young ones is similar to the relationship between young and elderly people in a society.
 They build the future, the young ones with their strength and the others with their wisdom.
 You always run some risks, of course.
 The younger churches are likely to feel self-sufficient; the ancient ones are likely to want to impose on the younger churches their cultural models.
 But we build the future together.


Father Spadaro: What does the church need most at this historic moment?
 Do we need reforms?
 What are your wishes for the church in the coming years?
 What kind of church do you dream of?


Pope Francis: Pope Benedict has done an act of holiness, greatness, humility.
 He is a man of God.


I see clearly that the thing the church needs most today is the ability to heal wounds and to warm the hearts of the faithful; it needs nearness, proximity.
 I see the church as a field hospital after battle.
 It is useless to ask a seriously injured person if he has high cholesterol and about the level of his blood sugars!
 You have to heal his wounds.
 Then we can talk about everything else.
 Heal the wounds, heal the wounds.
.
.
.
 And you have to start from the ground up.


The church sometimes has locked itself up in small things, in small-minded rules.
 The most important thing is the first proclamation: Jesus Christ has saved you.
 And the ministers of the church must be ministers of mercy above all.
 The confessor, for example, is always in danger of being either too much of a rigorist or too lax.
 Neither is merciful, because neither of them really takes responsibility for the person.
 The rigorist washes his hands so that he leaves it to the commandment.
 The loose minister washes his hands by simply saying, ‘This is not a sin’ or something like that.
 In pastoral ministry we must accompany people, and we must heal their wounds.


How are we treating the people of God?
 I dream of a church that is a mother and shepherdess.
 The church’s ministers must be merciful, take responsibility for the people and accompany them like the good Samaritan, who washes, cleans and raises up his neighbor.
 This is pure Gospel.
 God is greater than sin.
 The structural and organizational reforms are secondary—that is, they come afterward.
 The first reform must be the attitude.
 The ministers of the Gospel must be people who can warm the hearts of the people, who walk through the dark night with them, who know how to dialogue and to descend themselves into their people’s night, into the darkness, but without getting lost.
 The people of God want pastors, not clergy acting like bureaucrats or government officials.
 The bishops, particularly, must be able to support the movements of God among their people with patience, so that no one is left behind.
 But they must also be able to accompany the flock that has a flair for finding new paths.


Instead of being just a church that welcomes and receives by keeping the doors open, let us try also to be a church that finds new roads, that is able to step outside itself and go to those who do not attend Mass, to those who have quit or are indifferent.
 The ones who quit sometimes do it for reasons that, if properly understood and assessed, can lead to a return.
 But that takes audacity and courage.


Father Spadaro: I mention to Pope Francis that there are Christians who live in situations that are irregular for the church or in complex situations that represent open wounds.
 I mention the divorced and remarried, same-sex couples and other difficult situations.
 What kind of pastoral work can we do in these cases?
 What kinds of tools can we use?


Pope Francis: We need to proclaim the Gospel on every street corner, preaching the good news of the kingdom and healing, even with our preaching, every kind of disease and wound.
 In Buenos Aires I used to receive letters from homosexual persons who are ‘socially wounded’ because they tell me that they feel like the church has always condemned them.
 But the church does not want to do this.
 During the return flight from Rio de Janeiro I said that if a homosexual person is of good will and is in search of God, I am no one to judge.
 By saying this, I said what the catechism says.
 Religion has the right to express its opinion in the service of the people, but God in creation has set us free: it is not possible to interfere spiritually in the life of a person.


A person once asked me, in a provocative manner, if I approved of homosexuality.
 I replied with another question: ‘Tell me: when God looks at a gay person, does he endorse the existence of this person with love, or reject and condemn this person?
’ We must always consider the person.
 Here we enter into the mystery of the human being.
 In life, God accompanies persons, and we must accompany them, starting from their situation.
 It is necessary to accompany them with mercy.
 When that happens, the Holy Spirit inspires the priest to say the right thing.


This is also the great benefit of confession as a sacrament: evaluating case by case and discerning what is the best thing to do for a person who seeks God and grace.
 The confessional is not a torture chamber, but the place in which the Lord’s mercy motivates us to do better.
 I also consider the situation of a woman with a failed marriage in her past and who also had an abortion.
 Then this woman remarries, and she is now happy and has five children.
 That abortion in her past weighs heavily on her conscience and she sincerely regrets it.
 She would like to move forward in her Christian life.
 What is the confessor to do?


We cannot insist only on issues related to abortion, gay marriage and the use of contraceptive methods.
 This is not possible.
 I have not spoken much about these things, and I was reprimanded for that.
 But when we speak about these issues, we have to talk about them in a context.
 The teaching of the church, for that matter, is clear and I am a son of the church, but it is not necessary to talk about these issues all the time.


The dogmatic and moral teachings of the church are not all equivalent.
 The church’s pastoral ministry cannot be obsessed with the transmission of a disjointed multitude of doctrines to be imposed insistently.
 Proclamation in a missionary style focuses on the essentials, on the necessary things: this is also what fascinates and attracts more, what makes the heart burn, as it did for the disciples at Emmaus.
 We have to find a new balance; otherwise even the moral edifice of the church is likely to fall like a house of cards, losing the freshness and fragrance of the Gospel.
 The proposal of the Gospel must be more simple, profound, radiant.
 It is from this proposition that the moral consequences then flow.


I say this also thinking about the preaching and content of our preaching.
 A beautiful homily, a genuine sermon must begin with the first proclamation, with the proclamation of salvation.
 There is nothing more solid, deep and sure than this proclamation.
 Then you have to do catechesis.
 Then you can draw even a moral consequence.
 But the proclamation of the saving love of God comes before moral and religious imperatives.
 Today sometimes it seems that the opposite order is prevailing.
 The homily is the touchstone to measure the pastor’s proximity and ability to meet his people, because those who preach must recognize the heart of their community and must be able to see where the desire for God is lively and ardent.
 The message of the Gospel, therefore, is not to be reduced to some aspects that, although relevant, on their own do not show the heart of the message of Jesus Christ.


Father Spadaro: What is the specific place of religious men and women in the church of today?


Pope Francis: Religious men and women are prophets.
 They are those who have chosen a following of Jesus that imitates his life in obedience to the Father, poverty, community life and chastity.
 In this sense, the vows cannot end up being caricatures; otherwise, for example, community life becomes hell, and chastity becomes a way of life for unfruitful bachelors.
 The vow of chastity must be a vow of fruitfulness.
 In the church, the religious are called to be prophets in particular by demonstrating how Jesus lived on this earth, and to proclaim how the kingdom of God will be in its perfection.
 A religious must never give up prophecy.
 This does not mean opposing the hierarchical part of the church, although the prophetic function and the hierarchical structure do not coincide.
 I am talking about a proposal that is always positive, but it should not cause timidity.
 Let us think about what so many great saints, monks and religious men and women have done, from St.
 Anthony the Abbot onward.
 Being prophets may sometimes imply making waves.
 I do not know how to put it.
.
.
.
 Prophecy makes noise, uproar, some say ‘a mess.
’ But in reality, the charism of religious people is like yeast: prophecy announces the spirit of the Gospel.


Father Spadaro: What do you think of the dicasteries of the Roman Curia, the various departments that assist you in your mission?


Pope Francis: The dicasteries of the Roman Curia are at the service of the pope and the bishops.
 They must help both the particular churches and the bishops’ conferences.
 They are instruments of help.
 In some cases, however, when they are not functioning well, they run the risk of becoming institutions of censorship.
 It is amazing to see the denunciations for lack of orthodoxy that come to Rome.
 I think the cases should be investigated by the local bishops’ conferences, which can get valuable assistance from Rome.
 These cases, in fact, are much better dealt with locally.
 The Roman congregations are mediators; they are not middlemen or managers.


Father Spadaro: How can we reconcile in harmony Petrine primacy and collegiality?
 Which roads are feasible also from an ecumenical perspective?


Pope Francis: We must walk together: the people, the bishops and the pope.
 Synodality should be lived at various levels.
 Maybe it is time to change the methods of the Synod of Bishops, because it seems to me that the current method is not dynamic.
 This will also have ecumenical value, especially with our Orthodox brethren.
 From them we can learn more about the meaning of episcopal collegiality and the tradition of synodality.
 The joint effort of reflection, looking at how the church was governed in the early centuries, before the breakup between East and West, will bear fruit in due time.
 In ecumenical relations it is important not only to know each other better, but also to recognize what the Spirit has sown in the other as a gift for us.
 I want to continue the discussion that was begun in 2007 by the joint commission on how to exercise the Petrine primacy, which led to the signing of the Ravenna Document.
 We must continue on this path.


Father Spadaro: How do you envision the future unity of the church in light of this response?


Pope Francis: We must walk united with our differences: there is no other way to become one.
 This is the way of Jesus.


Father Spadaro: What should be the role of women in the church?
 How do we make their role more visible today?


Pope Francis: I am wary of a solution that can be reduced to a kind of ‘female machismo,’ because a woman has a different make-up than a man.
 But what I hear about the role of women is often inspired by an ideology of machismo.
 Women are asking deep questions that must be addressed.
 The church cannot be herself without the woman and her role.
 The woman is essential for the church.
 Mary, a woman, is more important than the bishops.
 I say this because we must not confuse the function with the dignity.
 We must therefore investigate further the role of women in the church.
 We have to work harder to develop a profound theology of the woman.
 Only by making this step will it be possible to better reflect on their function within the church.
 The feminine genius is needed wherever we make important decisions.
 The challenge today is this: to think about the specific place of women also in those places where the authority of the church is exercised for various areas of the church.


Father Spadaro: What did the Second Vatican Council accomplish?


Pope Francis: Vatican II was a re-reading of the Gospel in light of contemporary culture.
 Vatican II produced a renewal movement that simply comes from the same Gospel.
 Its fruits are enormous.
 Just recall the liturgy.
 The work of liturgical reform has been a service to the people as a re-reading of the Gospel from a concrete historical situation.
 Yes, there are hermeneutics of continuity and discontinuity, but one thing is clear: the dynamic of reading the Gospel, actualizing its message for today—which was typical of Vatican II—is absolutely irreversible.
 Then there are particular issues, like the liturgy according to the Vetus Ordo.
 I think the decision of Pope Benedict [his decision of July 7, 2007, to allow a wider use of the Tridentine Mass] was prudent and motivated by the desire to help people who have this sensitivity.
 What is worrying, though, is the risk of the ideologization of the Vetus Ordo, its exploitation.


Father Spadaro: How do you seek and find God in all things?


Pope Francis: What I said in Rio referred to the time in which we seek God.
 In fact, there is a temptation to seek God in the past or in a possible future.
 God is certainly in the past because we can see the footprints.
 And God is also in the future as a promise.
 But the ‘concrete’ God, so to speak, is today.
 For this reason, complaining never helps us find God.
 The complaints of today about how ‘barbaric’ the world is—these complaints sometimes end up giving birth within the church to desires to establish order in the sense of pure conservation, as a defense.
 No: God is to be encountered in the world of today.


God manifests himself in historical revelation, in history.
 Time initiates processes, and space crystallizes them.
 God is in history, in the processes.


We must not focus on occupying the spaces where power is exercised, but rather on starting long-run historical processes.
 We must initiate processes rather than occupy spaces.
 God manifests himself in time and is present in the processes of history.
 This gives priority to actions that give birth to new historical dynamics.
 And it requires patience, waiting.


Finding God in all things is not an ‘empirical eureka.
’ When we desire to encounter God, we would like to verify him immediately by an empirical method.
 But you cannot meet God this way.
 God is found in the gentle breeze perceived by Elijah.
 The senses that find God are the ones St.
 Ignatius called spiritual senses.
 Ignatius asks us to open our spiritual sensitivity to encounter God beyond a purely empirical approach.
 A contemplative attitude is necessary: it is the feeling that you are moving along the good path of understanding and affection toward things and situations.
 Profound peace, spiritual consolation, love of God and love of all things in God—this is the sign that you are on this right path.


Father Spadaro: So if the encounter with God is not an ‘empirical eureka,’ and if it is a journey that sees with the eyes of history, then we can also make mistakes?


Pope Francis: Yes, in this quest to seek and find God in all things there is still an area of uncertainty.
 There must be.
 If a person says that he met God with total certainty and is not touched by a margin of uncertainty, then this is not good.
 For me, this is an important key.
 If one has the answers to all the questions—that is the proof that God is not with him.
 It means that he is a false prophet using religion for himself.
 The great leaders of the people of God, like Moses, have always left room for doubt.
 You must leave room for the Lord, not for our certainties; we must be humble.
 Uncertainty is in every true discernment that is open to finding confirmation in spiritual consolation.


The risk in seeking and finding God in all things, then, is the willingness to explain too much, to say with human certainty and arrogance: ‘God is here.
’ We will find only a god that fits our measure.
 The correct attitude is that of St.
 Augustine: seek God to find him, and find God to keep searching for God forever.
 Often we seek as if we were blind, as one often reads in the Bible.
 And this is the experience of the great fathers of the faith, who are our models.
 We have to re-read the Letter to the Hebrews, Chapter 11.
 Abraham leaves his home without knowing where he was going, by faith.
 All of our ancestors in the faith died seeing the good that was promised, but from a distance.
.
.
.
 Our life is not given to us like an opera libretto, in which all is written down; but it means going, walking, doing, searching, seeing.
.
.
.
 We must enter into the adventure of the quest for meeting God; we must let God search and encounter us.


Because God is first; God is always first and makes the first move.
 God is a bit like the almond flower of your Sicily, Antonio, which always blooms first.
 We read it in the Prophets.
 God is encountered walking, along the path.
 At this juncture, someone might say that this is relativism.
 Is it relativism?
 Yes, if it is misunderstood as a kind of indistinct pantheism.
 It is not relativism if it is understood in the biblical sense, that God is always a surprise, so you never know where and how you will find him.
 You are not setting the time and place of the encounter with him.
 You must, therefore, discern the encounter.
 Discernment is essential.


If the Christian is a restorationist, a legalist, if he wants everything clear and safe, then he will find nothing.
 Tradition and memory of the past must help us to have the courage to open up new areas to God.
 Those who today always look for disciplinarian solutions, those who long for an exaggerated doctrinal ‘security,’ those who stubbornly try to recover a past that no longer exists­—they have a static and inward-directed view of things.
 In this way, faith becomes an ideology among other ideologies.
 I have a dogmatic certainty: God is in every person’s life.
 God is in everyone’s life.
 Even if the life of a person has been a disaster, even if it is destroyed by vices, drugs or anything else—God is in this person’s life.
 You can, you must try to seek God in every human life.
 Although the life of a person is a land full of thorns and weeds, there is always a space in which the good seed can grow.
 You have to trust God.


Father Spadaro: Do we have to be optimistic?
 What are the signs of hope in today’s world?
 How can I be optimistic in a world in crisis?


I do not like to use the word optimism because that is about a psychological attitude,” the pope says.
 “I like to use the word hope instead, according to what we read in the Letter to the Hebrews, Chapter 11, that I mentioned before.
 The fathers of the faith kept walking, facing difficulties.
 And hope does not disappoint, as we read in the Letter to the Romans.
 Think instead of the first riddle of Puccini’s opera ‘Turandot.
’

See, Christian hope is not a ghost and it does not deceive.
 It is a theological virtue and therefore, ultimately, a gift from God that cannot be reduced to optimism, which is only human.
 God does not mislead hope; God cannot deny himself.
 God is all promise.


Father Spadaro: Who are the artists and writers you prefer, and do they have something in common?


Pope Francis: I have really loved a diverse array of authors.
 I love very much Dostoevsky and Hölderlin.
 I remember Hölderlin for that poem written for the birthday of his grandmother that is very beautiful and was spiritually very enriching for me.
 The poem ends with the verse, ‘May the man hold fast to what the child has promised.
’ I was also impressed because I loved my grandmother Rosa, and in that poem Hölderlin compares his grandmother to the Virgin Mary, who gave birth to Jesus, the friend of the earth who did not consider anybody a foreigner.


I have read The Betrothed, by Alessandro Manzoni, three times, and I have it now on my table because I want to read it again.
 Manzoni gave me so much.
 When I was a child, my grandmother taught me by heart the beginning of The Betrothed: ‘That branch of Lake Como that turns off to the south between two unbroken chains of mountains.
.
.
.
’ I also liked Gerard Manley Hopkins very much.


Among the great painters, I admire Caravaggio; his paintings speak to me.
 But also Chagall, with his ‘White Crucifixion.
’ Among musicians I love Mozart, of course.
 The ‘Et incarnatus est’ from his Mass in C minor is matchless; it lifts you to God!
 I love Mozart performed by Clara Haskil.
 Mozart fulfills me.
 But I cannot think about his music; I have to listen to it.
 I like listening to Beethoven, but in a Promethean way, and the most Promethean interpreter for me is Furtwängler.
 And then Bach’s Passions.
 The piece by Bach that I love so much is the ‘Erbarme Dich,’ the tears of Peter in the ‘St.
 Matthew Passion.
’ Sublime.
 Then, at a different level, not intimate in the same way, I love Wagner.
 I like to listen to him, but not all the time.
 The performance of Wagner’s ‘Ring’ by Furtwängler at La Scala in Milan in 1950 is for me the best.
 But also the ‘Parsifal’ by Knappertsbusch in 1962.


We should also talk about the cinema.
 ‘La Strada,’ by Fellini, is the movie that perhaps I loved the most.
 I identify with this movie, in which there is an implicit reference to St.
 Francis.
 I also believe that I watched all of the Italian movies with Anna Magnani and Aldo Fabrizi when I was between 10 and 12 years old.
 Another film that I loved is ‘Rome, Open City.
’ I owe my film culture especially to my parents who used to take us to the movies quite often.


Anyway, in general I love tragic artists, especially classical ones.
 There is a nice definition that Cervantes puts on the lips of the bachelor Carrasco to praise the story of Don Quixote: ‘Children have it in their hands, young people read it, adults understand it, the elderly praise it.
’ For me this can be a good definition of the classics.


Father Spadaro: I ask the pope about teaching literature to his secondary school students.


Pope Francis: It was a bit risky.
 I had to make sure that my students read El Cid.
 But the boys did not like it.
 They wanted to read Garcia Lorca.
 Then I decided that they would study El Cid at home and that in class I would teach the authors the boys liked the most.
 Of course, young people wanted to read more ‘racy’ literary works, like the contemporary La Casada Infiel or classics like La Celestina, by Fernando de Rojas.
 But by reading these things they acquired a taste in literature, poetry, and we went on to other authors.
 And that was for me a great experience.
 I completed the program, but in an unstructured way—that is, not ordered according to what we expected in the beginning, but in an order that came naturally by reading these authors.
 And this mode befitted me: I did not like to have a rigid schedule, but rather I liked to know where we had to go with the readings, with a rough sense of where we were headed.
 Then I also started to get them to write.
 In the end I decided to send Borges two stories written by my boys.
 I knew his secretary, who had been my piano teacher.
 And Borges liked those stories very much.
 And then he set out to write the introduction to a collection of these writings.


Father Spadaro: Then, Holy Father, creativity is important for the life of a person?


Pope Francis: For a Jesuit it is extremely important!
 A Jesuit must be creative.


Father Spadaro: What should be the priorities of journals published by the Society of Jesus?


Pope Francis: The three key words that I commended to La Civiltà Cattolica can be extended to all the journals of the Society, perhaps with different emphases according to their natures and their objectives.
 When I insist on the frontier, I am referring in a particular way to the need for those who work in the world of culture to be inserted into the context in which they operate and on which they reflect.
 There is always the lurking danger of living in a laboratory.
 Ours is not a ‘lab faith,’ but a ‘journey faith,’ a historical faith.
 God has revealed himself as history, not as a compendium of abstract truths.
 I am afraid of laboratories because in the laboratory you take the problems and then you bring them home to tame them, to paint them, out of their context.
 You cannot bring home the frontier, but you have to live on the border and be audacious.


When it comes to social issues, it is one thing to have a meeting to study the problem of drugs in a slum neighborhood and quite another thing to go there, live there and understand the problem from the inside and study it.
 There is a brilliant letter by Father Arrupe to the Centers for Social Research and Action on poverty, in which he says clearly that one cannot speak of poverty if one does not experience poverty, with a direct connection to the places in which there is poverty.
 The word insertion is dangerous because some religious have taken it as a fad, and disasters have occurred because of a lack of discernment.
 But it is truly important.


The frontiers are many.
 Let us think of the religious sisters living in hospitals.
 They live on the frontier.
 I am alive because of one of them.
 When I went through my lung disease at the hospital, the doctor gave me penicillin and streptomycin in certain doses.
 The sister who was on duty tripled my doses because she was daringly astute; she knew what to do because she was with ill people all day.
 The doctor, who really was a good one, lived in his laboratory; the sister lived on the frontier and was in dialogue with it every day.
 Domesticating the frontier means just talking from a remote location, locking yourself up in a laboratory.
 Laboratories are useful, but reflection for us must always start from experience.


Father Spadaro: I ask Pope Francis about the enormous changes occurring in society and the way human beings are reinterpreting themselves.


Pope Francis: St.
 Vincent of Lerins makes a comparison between the biological development of man and the transmission from one era to another of the deposit of faith, which grows and is strengthened with time.
 Here, human self-understanding changes with time and so also human consciousness deepens.
 Let us think of when slavery was accepted or the death penalty was allowed without any problem.
 So we grow in the understanding of the truth.
 Exegetes and theologians help the church to mature in her own judgment.
 Even the other sciences and their development help the church in its growth in understanding.
 There are ecclesiastical rules and precepts that were once effective, but now they have lost value or meaning.
 The view of the church’s teaching as a monolith to defend without nuance or different understandings is wrong.


After all, in every age of history, humans try to understand and express themselves better.
 So human beings in time change the way they perceive themselves.
 It’s one thing for a man who expresses himself by carving the ‘Winged Victory of Samothrace,’ yet another for Caravaggio, Chagall and yet another still for Dalí.
 Even the forms for expressing truth can be multiform, and this is indeed necessary for the transmission of the Gospel in its timeless meaning.


Humans are in search of themselves, and, of course, in this search they can also make mistakes.
 The church has experienced times of brilliance, like that of Thomas Aquinas.
 But the church has lived also times of decline in its ability to think.
 For example, we must not confuse the genius of Thomas Aquinas with the age of decadent Thomist commentaries.
 Unfortunately, I studied philosophy from textbooks that came from decadent or largely bankrupt Thomism.
 In thinking of the human being, therefore, the church should strive for genius and not for decadence.


When does a formulation of thought cease to be valid?
 When it loses sight of the human or even when it is afraid of the human or deluded about itself.
 The deceived thought can be depicted as Ulysses encountering the song of the Siren, or as Tannhäuser in an orgy surrounded by satyrs and bacchantes, or as Parsifal, in the second act of Wagner’s opera, in the palace of Klingsor.
 The thinking of the church must recover genius and better understand how human beings understand themselves today, in order to develop and deepen the church’s teaching.


Father Spadaro: What is your preferred way to pray?


Pope Francis: I pray the breviary every morning.
 I like to pray with the psalms.
 Then, later, I celebrate Mass.
 I pray the Rosary.
 What I really prefer is adoration in the evening, even when I get distracted and think of other things, or even fall asleep praying.
 In the evening then, between seven and eight o’clock, I stay in front of the Blessed Sacrament for an hour in adoration.
 But I pray mentally even when I am waiting at the dentist or at other times of the day.


Prayer for me is always a prayer full of memory, of recollection, even the memory of my own history or what the Lord has done in his church or in a particular parish.
 For me it is the memory of which St.
 Ignatius speaks in the First Week of the Exercises in the encounter with the merciful Christ crucified.
 And I ask myself: ‘What have I done for Christ?
 What am I doing for Christ?
 What should I do for Christ?
’ It is the memory of which Ignatius speaks in the ‘Contemplation for Experiencing Divine Love,’ when he asks us to recall the gifts we have received.
 But above all, I also know that the Lord remembers me.
 I can forget about him, but I know that he never, ever forgets me.
 Memory has a fundamental role for the heart of a Jesuit: memory of grace, the memory mentioned in Deuteronomy, the memory of God’s works that are the basis of the covenant between God and the people.
 It is this memory that makes me his son and that makes me a father, too.


"In the course of this year, you have the honour and the responsibility of presiding over the Group of the twenty largest economies in the world.
 I am aware that the Russian Federation has participated in this group from the moment of its inception and has always had a positive role to play in the promotion of good governance of the world’s finances, which have been deeply affected by the crisis of 2008.

In today’s highly interdependent context, a global financial framework with its own just and clear rules is required in order to achieve a more equitable and fraternal world, in which it is possible to overcome hunger, ensure decent employment and housing for all, as well as essential healthcare.
 Your presidency of the G20 this year has committed itself to consolidating the reform of the international financial organizations and to achieving a consensus on financial standards suited to today’s circumstances.
 However, the world economy will only develop if it allows a dignified way of life for all human beings, from the eldest to the unborn child, not just for citizens of the G20 member states but for every inhabitant of the earth, even those in extreme social situations or in the remotest places.

From this standpoint, it is clear that, for the world’s peoples, armed conflicts are always a deliberate negation of international harmony, and create profound divisions and deep wounds which require many years to heal.
 Wars are a concrete refusal to pursue the great economic and social goals that the international community has set itself, as seen, for example, in the Millennium Development Goals.
 Unfortunately, the many armed conflicts which continue to afflict the world today present us daily with dramatic images of misery, hunger, illness and death.
 Without peace, there can be no form of economic development.
 Violence never begets peace, the necessary condition for development.

The meeting of the Heads of State and Government of the twenty most powerful economies, with two-thirds of the world’s population and ninety per cent of global GDP, does not have international security as its principal purpose.
 Nevertheless, the meeting will surely not forget the situation in the Middle East and particularly in Syria.
 It is regrettable that, from the very beginning of the conflict in Syria, one-sided interests have prevailed and in fact hindered the search for a solution that would have avoided the senseless massacre now unfolding.
 The leaders of the G20 cannot remain indifferent to the dramatic situation of the beloved Syrian people which has lasted far too long, and even risks bringing greater suffering to a region bitterly tested by strife and needful of peace.
 To the leaders present, to each and every one, I make a heartfelt appeal for them to help find ways to overcome the conflicting positions and to lay aside the futile pursuit of a military solution.
 Rather, let there be a renewed commitment to seek, with courage and determination, a peaceful solution through dialogue and negotiation of the parties, unanimously supported by the international community.
 Moreover, all governments have the moral duty to do everything possible to ensure humanitarian assistance to those suffering because of the conflict, both within and beyond the country’s borders.

Mr President, in the hope that these thoughts may be a valid spiritual contribution to your meeting, I pray for the successful outcome of the G20’s work on this occasion.
 I invoke an abundance of blessings upon the Summit in Saint Petersburg, upon the participants and the citizens of the member states, and upon the work and efforts of the 2013 Russian Presidency of the G20.

While requesting your prayers, I take this opportunity to assure you, Mr President, of my highest consideration.
"
Today, May 1st, we celebrate Saint Joseph the Worker and begin the month traditionally dedicated to Our Lady.
 In our encounter this morning, I want to focus on these two figures, so important in the life of Jesus, the Church and in our lives, with two brief thoughts: the first on work, the second on the contemplation of Jesus

1.
 In the Gospel of St.
 Matthew, in one of the moments when Jesus returns to his town, to Nazareth, and speaks in the synagogue, the amazement of his fellow townspeople at his wisdom is emphasized, and the question they ask: "Is not this the carpenter's son?
 "(13:55).
 Jesus comes into our history is among us, born of Mary by the power of God, but with the presence of Saint Joseph, the legal father who cares for him and also teaches him his work.
 Jesus is born and lives in a family, in the Holy Family, learning the craft of carpenter from Saint Joseph in his workshop in Nazareth, sharing with him the commitment, effort, satisfaction and also the difficulties of every day.

This reminds us of the dignity and importance of work.
 The book of Genesis tells us that God created man and woman entrusting them with the task of filling the earth and subduing it, which does not mean exploiting it, but nurturing and protecting it, caring for it through their work (cf.
 Gen 1:28; 2 15).
 Work is part of God’s loving plan, we are called to cultivate and care for all the goods of creation and in this way participate in the work of creation!
 Work is fundamental to the dignity of a person.
 Work, to use an image, "anoints" us with dignity, fills us with dignity, makes us similar to God, who has worked and still works, who always acts (cf.
 Jn 5:17); it gives you the ability to maintain ourselves, our family, to contribute to the growth of our nation.
 And here I think of the difficulties which, in various countries, today afflicts the world of work and business; I think of how many, and not just young people, are unemployed, many times due to a purely economic conception of society, which seeks selfish profit, beyond the parameters of social justice.

I wish to extend an invitation to solidarity to everyone, and I would like to encourage those in public office to make every effort to give new impetus to employment, this means caring for the dignity of the person, but above all I would say do not lose hope; St.
 Joseph also experienced moments of difficulty, but he never lost faith and was able to overcome them, in the certainty that God never abandons us.
 And then I would like to speak especially to you young people: be committed to your daily duties, your study, your work, to relationships of friendship, to helping towards others; your future also depends on how you live these precious years of your life.
 Do not be afraid of commitment, of sacrifice and do not look with fear towards the future; keep your hope alive: there is always a light on the horizon.

I would like to add a word about another particular work situation that concerns me: I am referring to what we could define as "slave labor", the work that enslaves.
 How many people worldwide are victims of this type of slavery, in which the person is at the service of his or her work, while work should offer a service to people so they may have dignity.
 I ask my brothers and sisters in faith and all men and women of good will for a decisive choice to combat trafficking in persons, which includes "slave labor".


2.
 In reference to the second thought: in the silence of daily events, St.
 Joseph, together with Mary, have one common center of attention: Jesus.
 They accompany and nurture, with commitment and tenderness, the growth of the Son of God made man for us, reflecting on everything that happened.
 In the Gospels, St.
 Luke twice emphasizes the attitude of Mary, which is also that of St.
 Joseph: "She kept all these things and pondered them in her heart" (2,19.
51).
 To listen to the Lord, we must learn to contemplate, feel His constant presence in our lives and we must stop and converse with Him, give him space in prayer.
 Each of us, even you boys and girls, young people, so many of you here this morning, should ask: how much space do I give to the Lord?
 Do I stop to talk with him?
 Ever since we were children, our parents have accustomed us to start and end the day with a prayer, to teach us to feel that the friendship and the love of God accompanies us.
 Let us remember the Lord more in our daily life!

And in this month of May, I would like to recall the importance and beauty of the prayer of the Holy Rosary.
 Reciting the Hail Mary, we are led to contemplate the mysteries of Jesus, that is, to reflect on the key moments of his life, so that, as with Mary and St.
 Joseph, He is the center of our thoughts, of our attention and our actions .
 It would be nice if, especially in this month of May, we could pray the Holy Rosary together in the family, with friends, in the parish, or some prayer to Jesus and the Virgin Mary!
 Praying together is a precious moment that further strengthens family life, friendship!
 Let us learn to pray more in the family and as a family!


Dear brothers and sisters, we ask Saint Joseph and the Virgin Mary, who teach us to be faithful to our daily tasks, to live our faith in the actions of everyday life and to give more space to the Lord in our lives, to stop to contemplate His face.

Vatican City: The following is the Vatican's official English translation of Pope Francis' speech "Urbi et Orbi" delivered in Italian from the central balcony of St Peter's Basilica.


"Brothers and sisters, good evening!


You know that it was the duty of the Conclave to give Rome a Bishop.
 It seems that my brother Cardinals have gone to the ends of the earth to get one.
.
.
 But here we are.
.
.
 I thank you for your welcome.
 The diocesan community of Rome now has its Bishop.
 Thank you!
 And first of all, I would like to offer a prayer for our Bishop Emeritus, Benedict XVI.
 Let us pray together for him, that the Lord may bless him and that Our Lady may keep him.


(Our Father.
.
.
 Hail Mary.
.
.
 Glory Be.
.
.
 )

And now, we take up this journey: Bishop and People.
 This journey of the Church of Rome which presides in charity over all the Churches.
 A journey of fraternity, of love, of trust among us.
 Let us always pray for one another.
 Let us pray for the whole world, that there may be a great spirit of fraternity.
 It is my hope for you that this journey of the Church, which we start today, and in which my Cardinal Vicar, here present, will assist me, will be fruitful for the evangelization of this most beautiful city.


And now I would like to give the blessing, but first I ask a favour of you: before the Bishop blesses his people, I ask you to pray to the Lord that he will bless me: the prayer of the people asking the blessing for their Bishop.
 Let us make, in silence, this prayer: your prayer over me.
 (.
.
.
)

Now I will give the Blessing to you and to the whole world, to all men and women of good will.
 (Blessing) Brothers and sisters, I leave you now.
 Thank you for your welcome.
 Pray for me and until we meet again.
 We will see each other soon.
 Tomorrow I wish to go and pray to Our Lady, that she may watch over all of Rome.
 Good night and sleep well!
.

If a person is gay and seeks God and has good will, who am I to judge him?
 The Catechism of the Catholic Church explains this very well.
 It says they should not be marginalized because of this (orientation) but that they must be integrated into society.


The problem is not having this orientation.
 We must be brothers.
 The problem is lobbying by this orientation, or lobbies of greedy people, political lobbies, Masonic lobbies, so many lobbies.
 This is the worse problem.


You see a lot written about the gay lobby.
 I still have not seen anyone in the Vatican with an identity card saying they are gay.


ON WOMEN PRIESTS

The Church has spoken and says 'no' that door is closed.
 "We cannot limit the role of women in the Church to altar girls or the president of a charity, there must be more.


But with regards to the ordination of women, the Church has spoken and says 'no'.
 Pope John Paul said so with a formula that was definitive.
 That door is closed.

